ills 


Case- 


No. 


LIBRARY 


Shelf 

LAWS. 


35.  — That  any  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber,  may  take 
from  the  Library  any  book  except  unbound  books,  pamphlets,  and 
periodicals,  and  books  decided  by  th$  Committee  to  be  for 
reference  only ; that  he  may  have  in  his  possession  only  one  of 
the  Society’s  volumes  at  the  same  time ; and  that  no  volume  shall 
be  taken  out  until  it  has  been  registered  by  the  Curator,  in  the 
name  of  the  said  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber. 

36.  — That  any  book  taken  out  of  the  Society’s  Library  may  be 
kept  fourteen  days,  but  not  for  a longer  period ; that  the  Honorary 
Secretary  shall  apply,  in  writing,  for  the  return  of  any  book 
at  the  end  of  the  fourteen  days  in  the  event  of  its  being  required 
by  any  other  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber ; that  on  the 
first  day  of  every  month  the  Hon.  Secretary  shall  apply,  in  writing, 
for  the  return  of  every  book  which  has  been  kept  upwards  of  one 
calendar  month,  and  that  a fine  of  three  pence  per  day  shall  be 
levied  for  every  day  each  volume  is  still  kept  beyond  six  days 
after  the  date  of  the  application  for  its  return. 

37.  — That  if  any  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber,  lend, 
out  of  his  house,  any  book  belonging  to  the  Society  to  any  person 
whatsoever,  whether  a Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber,  of  the 
Society,  or  not,  he  shall  pay  a fine  of  one  shilling  for  each  volume 
so  lent,  in  addition  to  any  fine  which  may  be  due  by  him  for 
having  kept  the  said  volume  beyond  the  time  allowed. 

38.  — That  if  any  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber,  injure 
any  book  belonging  to  the  Society,  he  shall  pay  such  fine  as  the 
Committee  may  decide  to  be  an  equivalent  for  the  injury  done  to 
the  said  book  ; and  that  such  fine  shall  not  exceed  the  original 
cost  of  such  book,  or  the  set  of  books  of  which  it  forms  a part. 

39.  — That  if  any  Member,  or  Associate,  or  Subscriber,  lose 
any  book  belonging  to  the  Society,  he  shall  pay  the  original  cost 
of  such  book,  or  of  the  set  of  books  of  which  it  forms  a part. 


https://archive.org/details/expeditionofpedr00sirno_0 


' > 


REPORT  FOR  1861. 


The  Council  have  great  satisfaction  in  reporting  that  the 
Hakluyt  Society,  which  has  now  completed  the  fourteenth 
year  of  its  existence,  continues  in  a prosperous  condition, 
both  as  regards  the  number  of  its  members,  and  the  state  of 
its  funds ; and  that,  for  this  year,  as  for  every  previous  year 
excepting  1853,  two  volumes  will  be  issued  to  the  Members 
of  the  Society. 

Since  the  last  General  Meeting,  the  following  volumes  have 
been  delivered  to  Members  : 

“ The  Narrative  of  the  Embassy  of  Ruy  Gonzales  de 
Clavijo  to  the  Court  of  Timour  at  Samarcand,  A.D.  1403-6." 
Translated  for  the  first  time,  with  Notes,  a Preface,  and 
an  Introductory  Life  of  Timour,  by  Clements  R Mark- 
ham, Esq. 

“ A Collection  of  Documents,  forming  a Monograph  of 
the  Voyages  of  Henry  Hudson."  Edited,  with  an 
Introduction,  by  George  Asher,  Esq.,  LL.D. 


2 


Two  volumes  are  in  course  of  preparation,  which  will  he 
delivered  to  Members,  for  the  year  1861,  viz. : 

“The  Expedition  of  Ursua  and  Aguirre,  in  search  of 
El  Dorado  and  Omagua,  A.D.  1560-61/'  translated  from 
the  “ Sexta  Noticia  historial"  of  Fray  Pedro  Simon,  by 
W.  Bollaert,  Esq. ; with  an  Introduction  by  Clements 
R.  Markham,  Esq. 

“ The  Discoveries  of  the  World  from  their  first  original 
unto  the  year  of  our  Lord  1555,  by  Antonio  Galvano, 
Governor  of  Ternate,  corrected,  quoted,  and  published  in 
English  by  Richard  Hakluyt  (1601),"  now  reprinted,  with 
the  original  Portuguese  text,  and  edited  by  Rear-Admiral 
Bethune. 

In  addition  to  the  above  works,  two  others  have  been 
undertaken  by  Editors,  which  will  provide  for  the  demands  of 
the  ensuing  year,  viz.  : 

“The  Life  and  Acts  of  Don  Alonzo  de  Guzman  y 
Henriquez,  written  by  himself,"  containing  a Narrative 
of  his  Adventures  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  other  parts  of 
Europe,  as  well  as  in  South  America,  during  the  reign 
of  Charles  Y.  Translated  from  a manuscript  in  the 
National  Library  at  Madrid,  by  Clements  R.  Markham, 
Esq. 


“ Account  of  the  Journey  of  Caterino  Zeno  to  the 
Empire  of  Persia,  in  the  time  of  Uzun  Hassan  ; and  of 
the  Discovery  of  Frislanda,  Eslanda,  Engroenlanda, 
Estotilanda,  and  Icaria,  by  the  two  brothers  Nicolo  and 
Antonio  Zeno.  The  Journey  to  Persia  edited,  with  notes 
and  an  Introduction,  by  Major  General  Sir  Henry  C. 


3 


Bawlinson,  K.C.B..  The  discovery  of  Frislanda,  etc., 
edited,  with  notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  R H.  Major, 
Esq.,  by  whom  the  whole  is  translated  from  the  edition 
of  Francesco  Marcolini,  Venice,  1558. 

The  following  six  Members  retire  from  the  Council,  viz.  : 

Sir  John  Bowring,  LL.D., 

Lieut. -General  C.  R Fox, 

Lord  Wensleydale, 

The  Rev.  W.  Whewell,  D.D., 

The  Bight  Hon.  Sir  David  Dundas,  M.P., 

His  Excellency  the  Count  de  Lavradio. 

Of  this  number,  the  three  following  are  recommended  for 
re-election,  viz.  : 

The  Right.  Hon.  Sir  David  Dundas,  M.P., 

His  Excellency  the  Count  de  Lavradio, 

The  Bev.  W.  Whewell,  D.D. 

And  the  names  of  the  following  gentlemen  are  proposed 
for  election : 

Charles  F.  Beke,  Esq.,  Phil.D., 

T.  Hodgkin,  Esq.,  M.D., 

Major-General  Sir  Henry  C.  Bawlinson,  K.C.B. 

The  Council  have  also  to  report  that  the  Honorary 
Secretary,  Mr.  Clements  B.  Markham,  having  returned  from 
India  last  May,  has  resumed  his  duties. 


4 


Statement  of  the  Accounts  of  the  Society  for  the  year  1860-1. 


£ s.  d. 

Balance  at  Bankers’  at  last  Audit  239  6 3 

Petty  Cash  8 11  5 

Received  by  Bankers  during  the 
year 273  8 0 


£521  5 8 


£ s.  d. 

Mr.  Richards,  for  Printing 219  17  0 

Mr.  J.  E.  Richard,  for  Paper 53  15  0 

Maps 22  8 0 

Index  4 14  0 

Gratuity  to  Agent’s  Foreman  5 0 0 

Transcriptions  3 11  4 

Stationery,  Parcels,  Postage,  and 
Sundries 2 16  0 


312  1 4 

Present  Balance  at  Bankers’ 208  19  5 

Present  Balance  in  Petty  Cash 0 4 11 


£521  5 8 


Examined  and  Approved,  November  11th,  1861. 

CHARLES  CANNON, 

WILLIAM  YOUNGER  FLETCHER. 


THE 


HAKLUYT  SOCIETY. 


President. 

SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON,  G.C.St.S.  F.R.S.,  D.C.L. 

Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  St.  Petersburg,  Corr.  Mem.  Inst.  Fr.,  &c.  &e. 

Vice-Presidents. 

The  MARQUIS  OF  LANSDOWNE. 

Rear-Admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATER  BETHUNE,  C.B. 

Council. 

T.  HODGKIN,  Esq.,  M.D. 

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A. 

His  Excellency  the  Count  de 
LAVRADIO. 

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F;S.A. 
Major-General  Sir  HENRY  C.  RAW- 
LINSON,  K.C.B. 

The  Rey.  W.  WHEWELL,  D.D. 


CHARLES  F.  BEKE,  Esq.,  Phil.D. 
Rt.  Hon.  LORD  BROUGHTON. 

The  Lord  ALFRED  SPENCER 
CHURCHILL. 

CHAS.  WENTWORTH  DILKE,  Esq. 
Rt.  Hon.  Sir  DAVID  DUNDAS. 

Sir  HENRY  ELLIS;  K.H.;  F.R.S. 
JOHN  FORSTER,  Esq. 


Honorary  Secretary.-- c.  R.  markham,  Esq. 

Bankers— Messrs.  RANSOM,  BOUVERIE,  AND  Co.,  1,  Pall  Mall  East. 


THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY,  which  is  established  for  the  purpose 
of  printing  rare  or  unpublished  Yoyages  and  Travels,  aims  at  opening 
by  this  means  an  easier  access  to  the  sources  of  a branch  of  know- 
ledge, which  yields  to  none  in  importance,  and  is  superior  to  most  in 
agreeable  variety.  The  narratives  of  travellers  and  navigators  make  us 
acquainted  with  the  earth,  its  inhabitants  and  productions;  they  exhibit 
the  growth  of  intercourse  among  mankind,  with  its  effects  on  civilization, 
and,  while  instructing,  they  at  the  same  time  awaken  attention,  by 
recounting  the  toils  and  adventures  of  those  who  first  explored  unknown 
and  distant  regions. 

The  advantage  of  an  Association  of  this  kind,  consists  not  merely  in  its 
system  of  literary  co-operation,  but  also  in  its  economy.  The  acquire- 
ments, taste,  and  discrimination  of  a number  of  individuals,  who  feel  an 
interest  in  the  same  pursuit,  are  thus  brought  to  act  in  voluntary  com- 
bination, and  the  ordinary  charges  of  publication  are  also  avoided,  so  that 
the  volumes  produced  are  distributed  among  the  Members  (who  can  alone 
obtain  them)  at  little  more  than  the  cost  of  printing  and  paper.  The 
Society  expends  the  whole  of  its  funds  in  the  preparation  of  works  for  the 
Members  ; and  since  the  cost  of  each  copy  varies  inversely  as  the  whole 
number  of  copies  printed,  it  is  obvious  that  the  Members  are  gainers 
individually  by  the  prosperity  of  the  Society,  and  the  consequent  vigour 
of  its  operations. 

New  Members  have , at  present,  the  'privilege  of  purchasing  the  complete 
set  of  the  publications  of  the  Society  for  previous  years  for  ten  guineas , 
but  have  not  the  power  of  selecting  any  particular  volume. 

The  Members  are  requested  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  power  of  the 
Council  to  make  advantageous  arrangements,  will  depend,  in  a great 
measure,  on  the  prompt  payment  of  the  subscriptions,  which  are  payable 
in  advance  on  the  1st  of  January,  and  are  received  by  Mr.  Richards, 
37,  Great  Queen  Street,  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields,  who  is  the  Society’s  agent 
for  the  delivery  of  its  volumes.  Post  Office  Orders  should  be  drawn  on 
the  Charing  Cross  Post  Office. 


November  1861. 


WORKS  ALREADY  ISSUED 


I 

i 


I 


1— The  Observations  of  Sir  Richard  Hawkins,  Knt. 

In  his  Voyage  into  the  South  Sea  in  1593.  Reprinted  from  the  edition  of  1622,  and  edited  by 
Capt.  C.  R.  Drinkwater  Bethune,  R.N.,  C.B.  [Issued for  1847. 

2— Select  Letters  of  Columbus. 

With  Original  Documents  relating  to  the  Discovery  of  the  New  World.  Translated  and 
Edited  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.  [Issued  for  1847. 

3— The  Discoverie  of  the  Empire  of  Guiana, 

By  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  Knt.  Edited,  with  Copious  Explanatory  Notes,  and  a Biographical 
Memoir,  by  Sir  Robert  H.  Schomburgk,  Phii.  D.,  etc.  [ Issued  for  1848. 

4— Sir  Francis  Drake  his  Voyage,  1595, 

By  Thomas  Maynarde,  together  with  the  Spanish  Account  of  Drake’s  Attack  on  Puerto  Rico, 
edited  from  the  Original  MSS.,  by  W.  D.  Cooley,  Esq.  [Issued  for  1848. 

5— Narratives  of  Early  Voyages 

Undertaken  for  the  Discovery  of  a Passage  to  Cathaia  and  India,  by  the  Northwest,  with 
Selections  from  the  Records  of  the  worshipful  Fellowship  of  the  Merchants  of  London,  trading 
into  the  East  Indies;  and  from  MSS.  in  the  Library  of  the  British  Museum,  now  first 
published,  by  Thomas  Rundall,  Esq.  [ Issued  for  1849. 


6— The  Historic  of  Travaile  into  Virginia  Britannia, 

Expressing  the  Cosrnographie  and  Commodities  of  the  Country,  together  with  the  Manners 
and  Customs  of  the  people,  gathered  and  observed  as  well  by  those  who  went  first  thither  as 
collected  by  William  Strachey,  Gent.,  the  first  Secretary  of  the  Colony ; now  first  Edited  from 
the  original  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum,  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum. 

[Issued  for  1849. 

7— Divers  Voyages  touching  the  Discovery  of  America, 

And  the  Islands  adjacent,  collected  and  published  by  Richard  Hakluyt,  Prebendary  of 
Bristol,  in  the  year  1582.  Edited,  with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  John  Winter  Jones, 
Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.  [Issued  for  1850. 

8— A Collection  of  Documents  on  Japan, 

With  a Commentary,  by  Thomas  Rundall,  Esq.  [Issued for  1850. 


9— The  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  Florida, 

By  Don  Ferdinando  de  Soto.  Translated  out  of  Portuguese,  by  Richard  Hakluyt;  and 
Edited  with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  W.  B.  Rye,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum. 

[Issued  for  1851. 


10— Notes  upon  Eussia, 

Being  a Translation  from  the  Earliest  Account  of  that  Country,  entitled  Rerum  Moscoviti- 
carum  Commentarii,  by  the  Baron  Sigismund  von  Herberstein,  Ambassador  from  the  Court 
of  Germany  to  the  Grand  Prince  Vasiley  Ivanovich,  in  the  years  1517  and  1526.  Two  Volumes. 
Translated,  and  Edited  with  Notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the 
British  Museum.  Vol.  1.  [Issued  for  1851. 


11— The  Geography  of  Hudson’s  Bay. 

Being  the  Remarks  of  Captain  W.  Coats,  in  many  Voyages  to  that  locality,  between  the  years 
1727  and  1751.  With  an  Appendix,  containing  Extracts  from  the  Log  of  Capt.  Middleton  on 
his  Voyage  for  the  discovery  of  the  North-west  Passage,  in  H.M.S.  “Furnace”,  in  1741-2. 

Edited  by  John  Barrow,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.  [Issued  for  1852. 

12— Notes  upon  Eussia.  Vol.  2.  [Issued  for  1852. 


13— Three  Voyages  by  the  North-east, 

Towards  Cathay  and  China,  undertaken  by  the  Dutch  in  the  years  1594,  1595,  and  1596,  with 
their  Discovery  of  Spitzbergen,  their  residence  of  ten  months  in  Novaya  Zemlya,  and  their  safe 
return  in  two  open  boats.  By  Gerrit  de  Veer.  Edited  by  C.  T.  Beke,  Esq.,  Ph.D.,  F.S.A. 

[Issued  for  1853. 

14-15— The  History  of  the  Great  and  Mighty  Kingdom  of  China  and 
the  Situation  Thereof. 

Compiled  by  the  Padre  Juan  Gonzalez  de  Mendoza.  And  now  Reprinted  from  the  Early 
Translation  of  R.  Parke.  Edited  by  Sir  George  T.  Staunton,  Bart.  With  an  Introduc- 
tion by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.  2 vols.  [Issued  for  1854. 

16— The  World  Encompassed  by  Sir  Francis  Drake, 

Being  his  next  Voyage  to  that  to  Nombre  de  Dios.  Collated  with  an  unpublished  Manuscript 
of  Francis  Fletcher,  Chaplain  to  the  Expedition.  With  Appendices  illustrative  of  the  same 
Voyage,  and  Introduction,  by  W.  S.  W.  Vaux,  Esq.,  M.A.  [Issued for  1855. 
17— The  History  of  the  Tartar  Conquerors  who  Subdued  China. 

From  the  French  of  the  Pere  D’Orleans,  1688.  Translated  and  Edited  by  the  Earl  oe 
Ellesmere.  With  an  Introduction  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.  [Issuedjor  1855. 


18— A Collection  of  Early  Documents  on  Spitzbergen  and  Greenland, 

Consisting  of : a translation  from  the  German  of  F.  Marten’s  important  work  on  Spitzbergen, 
now  very  rare ; a translation  from  Isaac  de  la  Peyrere’s  Relation  de  Groenland,  and  a rare 
piece  entitled  “ God’s  Power  and  Providence  showed  in  the  miraculous  preservation  and 
deliverance  of  eight  Englishmen,  left  by  mischance  in  Greenland,  anno  1630,  nine  moneths 
and  twelve  days,  faithfully  reported  by  Edward  Pelham.”  Edited,  with  Notes,  by 

Adam  White,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.  [Issued  for  1856. 

19— The  Voyage  of  Sir  Henry  Middleton  to  Bantam  and  the  Maluco  Islands. 

From  the  rare  Edition  of  1606.  Edited  by  Bolton  Corney,  Esq.  [Issued  for  1856. 

20— Russia  at  the  close  of  the  Sixteenth  Century. 

Comprising  “ The  Russe  Commonwealth”  by  Dr.  Giles  Fletcher,  and  Sir  Jerome  Horsey’s 
Travels,  now  first  printed  entire  from  his  manuscript  in  the  British  Museum.  Edited  by 
E.  A.  Bond,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum.  [Issued  for  1857. 

21— The  Travels  of  Girolamo  Benzoni,  in  America,  in  1542-56. 

Translated  and  edited  by  Admiral  W.  H.  Smyth,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A.  [ Issued  for  1857. 

22— India  in  the  Fifteenth  Century. 

Being  a Collection  of  Narratives  of  Voyages  to  India  in  the  century  preceding  the  Portuguese 
discovery  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope;  from  Latin,  Persian,  Russian,  and  Italian 
sources,  now  first  translated  into  English.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  R.  H. 
Major,  Esq.,  F.S.A.  [Issued for  1858. 

23— Narrative  of  a Voyage  to  the  West  Indies  and  Mexico. 

In  the  Years  1599-1602,  with  Maps  and  Illustrations.  By  Samuel  Champlain.  Translated 
from  the  original  and  unpublished  Manuscript,  with  a Biographical  Notice  and  Notes  by 
Alice  Wilmere.  Edited  by  Norton  Shaw.  [Issued  for  1858. 

24— Expeditions  into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons, 

During  the  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  centuries : containing  the  Journey  of  Gonzalo 
Pizarro,  from  the  Royal  Commentaries  of  Garcilasso  Inca  de  la  Vega;  the  Voyage  of 
Francisco  de  Orellana,  from  the  General  History  of  Hf.rrera;  and  the  Voyage  of  Cris- 
toval  de  Acuna,  from  an  exceedingly  scarce  narrative  written  by  himself,  in  1641.  Edited 
and  translated  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.  [Issued  for  1859. 

25— Early  Indications  of  Australia; 

A Collection  of  Documents  shewing  the  Early  Discoveries  of  Australia  to  the  time  of  Captain 
Cook.  Edited  by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum,  F.S.A.  [Issued  for  1859. 

26— The  Embassy  of  Ruy  Gonzalez  de  Clavijo  to  the  Court  of  Timour,  1403-6. 

Translated,  for  the  first  time,  with  Notes,  a Preface,  and  an  Introductory  Life  of  Timour  Beg, 
By  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S,  [Issued for  1860. 

27— Henry  Hudson  the  Navigator. 

The  Original"Documents  in  which  his  career  is  recorded.  Collected,  partly  Translated,  and 
Annotated,  with  an  Introduction,  by  George  Asher,  Esq.,  LL.D.  [Issued  for  1860. 

28— The  Expedition  of  TJrsua  and  Aguirre, 

In  search  of  El  Dorado  and  Omagua,  a.d.  1560-61,  translated  from  the  “ Sexta  Noticia  historial” 
of  Fray  Pedro  Simon,  by  W.  Bollaert,  Esq.;  with  an  introduction  by  C.  R.  Markham,  Esq. 

[Issued  for  1861. 

Other  Works  in  Progress. 

The  Fifth  Letter  of  Hernando  Cortes,  being  that  describing  his  Voyage  to  Honduras  in 
1525-6.  To  be  Translated  and  Edited  by  C.  G.  Squier,  Esq. 

The  Voyage  of  Vasco  de  Gama  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1497,  now  first  Translated 
from  a cotemporaneous  manuscript,  accompanied  by  other  documents  forming  a 
monograph  on  the  life  of  De  Gama.  To  be  translated  and  edited  by  Richard 
Garnett,  Esq.,  of  the  British  Museum. 

The  Discoveries  of  the  World  from  their  first  original  unto  the  year  of  our  Lord  1555,  by 
Antonio  Galvano,  Governor  of  Ternate,  corrected,  quoted,  and  published  in  English 
by  Richard  Hakluyt  (1601),  now  reprinted  with  the  original  Portuguese  text,  and 
edited  by  Rear-Admiral  Bethune. 

The  Life  and  Acts  of  Don  Alonzo  de  Guzman  y Henriquez,  written  by  himself,  con- 
taining a Narrative  of  his  Adventures  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  other  parts  of  Europe, 
as  well  as  in  South  America,  during  the  reign  of  Charles  V.  Translated  from  a 
manuscript  in  the  National  Library  at  Madrid,  by  Clements  R.  Markham,  Esq. 
Account  of  the  Journey  of  Caterino  Zeno  to  the  Empire  of  Persia  in  the  time  of  Uzun 
Hassan,  and  of  the  Discovery  of  Frislanda,  Eslanda,  Engroenlanda,  Estotilanda 
and  Icaria,  by  the  two  brothers  Nicolo  and  Antonio  Zeno.  The  Journey  to  Persia 
edited,  with  notes  and  an  Introduction,  by  Major-General  Sir  Henry  C.  Raw- 
linson,  K.C.B.  The  Discovery  of  Frislanda,  etc.,  edited,  with  notes  and  an  Intro- 
duction, by  R.  H.  Major,  Esq.,  by  whom  the  whole  is  translated  from  the  edition  of 
Francesco  Marcolini.  Venice,  1558. 

Works  suggested  to  the  Council  for  Publication. 

The  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  the  Canary  Islands,  by  Bethencourt,  in  1402-25;  and  the 
Voyages  of  Mendana  and  Quiros  in  the  South  Seas. 


Laws  of  the  Hakluyt  Society. 

I.  The  object  of  this  Society  shall  be  to  print,  for  distribution  among  its 
members,  rare  and  valuable  Voyages,  Travels,  Naval  Expeditions,  and  other 
geographical  records,  from  an  early  period  to  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth 
century. 

II.  The  Annual  Subscription  shall  be  One  Guinea,  payable  in  advance 
on  the  1st  January. 

III.  Each  member  of  the  Society,  having  paid  his  subscription,  shall  be 
entitled  to  a copy  of  every  work  produced  by  the  Society,  and  to  vote  at  the 
general  meetings  within  the  period  subscribed  for;  and  if  he  do  not  signify, 
before  the  close  of  the  year,  his  wish  to  resign,  he  shall  be  considered  as  a 
member  for  the  succeeding  year. 

IV.  The  management  of  the  Society’s  affairs  shall  be  vested  in  a Council 
consisting  of  twenty-one  members,  namely,  a President,  two  Vice-Presidents,  a 
Secretary,  and  seventeen  ordinary  members,  to  be  elected  annually ; but  vacan- 
cies occurring  between  the  general  meetings  shall  be  filled  up  by  the  Council. 

V.  A General  Meeting  of  the  Subscribers  shall  be  held  annually,  on  the 
first  Thursday  in  March.  The  Secretary’s  Report  on  the  condition  and 
proceedings  of  the  Society  shall  be  then  read,  and,  along  with  the  Auditor’s 
Report,  be  submitted  for  approval,  and  finally,  the  Meeting  shall  proceed  to 
elect  the  Council  for  the  ensuing  y£*ar. 

VI.  At  each  Annual  Election, ^six  of  the  old  Council  shall  retire;  and  a 
list  of  the  proposed  new  Council  shall  be  printed  for  the  subscribers  previous 
to  the  general  meeting. 

VII.  The  Council  shall  ipeet  ordinarily  on  the  2nd  Monday  in  every 
month,  excepting  August,  September,  and  October,  for  the  despatch  of 
business,  three  forming  a quorum,  and  the  Chairman  having  a casting  vote. 

VIII.  Gentlemen  preparing  and  editing  works  for  the  Society,  shall 
receive  twenty-five  copies  of  such  works  respectively. 

IX.  The  number  of  copies  printed  of  the  Society’s  productions  shall  not 
exceed  the  estimated  number  of  Subscribers;  so  that  after  the  second  year, 
when  the  Society  may  be  supposed  to  have  reached  its  full  growth,  there  shall 
be  no  extra  copies. 

X.  The  Society  shall  appoint  Local  Secretaries  throughout  the  kingdom, 
empowered  to  enrol  members,  transmit  subscriptions,  and  otherwise  forward 
the  Society’s  interests  ; and  it  shall  make  such  arrangements  with  its  corre- 
spondents in  the  chief  provincial  towns,  as  will  insure  to  subscribers  residing 
in  the  country  the  regular  delivery  of  their  volumes  at  moderate  charges. 


Rules  for  the  Delivery  of  the  Society’s  Volumes. 

I.  The  Society’s  productions  will  be  delivered  without  any  charge,  within 
three  miles  of  the  General  Post  Office. 

IE.  They  will  be  forwarded  to  any  place  beyond  that  limit,  the  Society 
paying  the  cost  of  booking,  but  not  of  carriage;  nor  will  it  be  answerable  in 
this  case  for  any  loss  or  damage. 

HI.  They  will  be  delivered  by  the  Society’s  agent,  Mr.  Thomas 
Richards,  37,  Great  Queen  Street,  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields,  to  persons  having 
written  authority  of  subscribers  to  receive  them. 

IV.  They  will  be  sent  to  the  Society’s  correspondents  or  agents  in  the 
principal  towns  throughout  the  kingdom ; and  care  shall  be  taken  that  the 
charge  for  carriage  be  as  moderate  as  possible. 


LIST  OF  MEMBERS 

OP 

THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY. 


Admiralty  (The),  2 copies 
Ainslie,  Philip  Barrington,  Esq.,  St.  Colme 
All  Souls  College,  Oxford 
Allen,  Mr.  E.,  12,  Tavistock-row,  Covent- 
garden 

Allport,  Franklin,  Esq.,  156,  Leadenhall-st. 
Alston,  Lieut.  A.  H.,  H.M.S.  St.  George, 
West  Indies 

Amsterdam,  de  Bibliothek  van  het  Collegie 
Zeemanshoop. 

Antiquaries,  the  Society  of 
Arlt,  Mr.,  Moscow 

Army  and  Navy  Club,  13,  St.  James  s- 
square. 

Arrowsmith,  John,  Esq.,  Here  ford-square, 
South  Kensington 
Ashton,  J.  Y.,  Esq.,  Liverpool 
Asher,  A.,  Berlin 
Athenaeum  Club,  The,  Pall  Mall 
Athenaeum  Library,  Boston,  U.S. 
Atkinson,  F.  R.,  Esq.,  Oak  House,  Pen- 
dleton, Manchester 

Dr.  Baikie 
Bancroft,  — , Esq. 

Bank  of  England  Library  and  Literary 
Association 

Baring,  Hon.  Francis,  M.P.,  16,  St. 
James’s-square 

Barlersque,  C.,  Esq.,  Bordeaux 
Barney,  Chas.  Gorham,  Richmond,  Vir- 
ginia 

Barrow,  J.,  Esq.,  F.R.S.  F.S.A.,  17,  Han- 
over terrace,  R-  gent’s  Park 
Batho,  J.  A.,  Esq.,  49,  Upper  Charlotte- 
street,  Fitzroy-square 
Becher,  Captain,  R.N.,  13,  Dorset  place, 
Dorset-square 

Beck,  Dr.,  New  York  State  Library,  Albany 
Beke,  Charles  T.,  Esq.,  Phil.  D.,  Bekes- 
bourne,  Canterbury 

Belcher,  Captain  Sir  Edward,  C.B.,  R.N., 
Union  Club,  Trafalgar  square 
Bell,  Reverend  Thomas,  Berbice 
Bell,  Robert,  Esq.,  Norris  Castle,  East 
Cowes,  I.W. 

Belfast  Library 

Benzon,  E.  L.  S.,  Esq.,  Sheffield 
Berlin,  The  Royal  Library  of 
Betencourt,  Alonzo,  Esq.,  Philadelphia 
Bethune,  Rear-Admiral  C.  R.  Drinkwater, 
C.B.,  4,  Cromwell-road,  Princes  Gate 
Bibliotheque  Imperiale,  Paris 


Biden,  Captain 
Birmingham  Library  fThe) 

Blackie,  Dr.  Walter  G.,  Villafield,  Glasgow 
Blyth,  James,  Esq.,  24,  Hyde-park-gardens 
Bois,  H.,  Esq.,  110,  Fenchurch-street 
Bombay  Geographical  Society 
Bone,  J.  H.  A.,  Esq.,  Cleveland,  Ohio, 
U.S. 

Booth,  B.  W.,  Esq.,  Manchester 
Boston  Athenaeum,  The 
Boston  Public  Library,  U.S. 

Botfield,  Beriah,Esq.,NortonHall,  North- 
...  amptonshire 
Bowring,  Sir  John,  LL.D. 

Bradshaw,  Lieut.  Lawrence,  Woolwich 
Brevorst,  J.  C.,  Esq.,  New  York 
Brockhaus,  F.  A.,  Esq.,  Leipzig 
Brodhead,  J.  R.,  Esq.,  New  York 
Broome,  Major  A. 

Broughton,  Lord,  42,  Berkeley- square 
Brown,  George,  Esq.,  Cambridge- street, 
Belgrave -square 

Brown,  J.  A.,  Esq.,  Newcastle-place, 
Clerkenwell 

Brown,  John  Carter,  Esq.,  Providence, 
Rhode  Island 

Brown,  R.,  Esq.,  Sydney  Mines,  Cape 
Breton 

Brown,  W.  H.,  Esq.,  Chester 
Bruce,  John,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  5,  Upper  Glou- 
cester-street,  Dorset-square 
Brussels,  Royal  Library  of 
Bunbury,  E.  H.  Esq.,  15,  Jermyn-street 
Burnett,  W.  F.,  Commander,  R.N. 


Cambridge  University  Library 
Campbell,  R.  IT.  S.,  Esq.,  5,  Argyle-place, 
Regent-street 

Canada,  The  Parliament  Library 
Cannon,  Charles,  Esq.,  British  Museum 
Carlton  Club,  Pall  Mall 
Chapman,  Mr.  John,  Strand 
Chapman,  William,  Esq.,  Richmond 
Chauncey,  Henry  C.,  Esq.,  New  York 
Chichester,  J.  H.  R.,  Esq.,  49,  Wimpole- 
street 

Christie,  Jonathan  Henry,  Esq.,  9,  Stan- 
hope-street, Hyde-park-gardens 
Churchill,  Lord  Alfred  S.,  F.R.G.S.,  16, 
Rutland  Gate 

Colledge,  Dr.,  Lauriston  House,  Chel- 
tenham 


6 


Collier,  John  Payne,  Esq.,  E.S.A. 

Colonial  Office  (The) 

Congress,  Library  of  the,  United  States 
Cooper,  Colonel  E.  H.  36,  Hertford-street 
Corney,  B.,  Esq.,  M.R.S.L.,  Bames-ter. 
Costello,  Dudley,  Esq.,  54,  Acacia-road, 
St.  John’s  Wood 
Cotton,  R.  W.,  Esq.,  Barnstaple 
Cracroft,  Capt.,  R.N. 

Cranstoun,  G.,  Esq.,  Corehouse,  Lanark 
Crowniushield, — , Esq.  (per  Mr.  Stevens) 
Cunard,  Edward,  Esq.,  New  York 

Dalrymple,  Arthur,  Esq. 

Dalton,  J.  Stuart,  Esq.,  for  the  Liverpool 
Free  Public  Library 
Deane,  Charles,  Esq.,  Boston,  U.S. 
Delepierre,  0.,  Esq.,  18,  Gioucester- 
terrace,  Hyde  Park 
Delft,  Royal  Academy  of 
Dilke,  C.  Wentworth,  Esq.,  76,  Sloane-st. 
Dilke,  C.  W.,  Esq.,  Jun.,  76,  Sloane-street 
Drake,  Samuel  G.,  Esq.,  Boston,  U.  S. 
Dry,  Thos.,  Esq.,  25,  Lincoln’s  Inn  Fields 
Ducie,  Earl,  30,  Princes-gate 
Dundas,  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  David,  13, 
King’s  Bench  Walk,  Temple 
Dundas,  George,  Esq.,  9,  Charlotte- 
square,  Edinburgh 

Dundas,  John,  Esq.,  25,  St.  Andrew’s- 
square,  Edinburgh 
Duprat,  M.  B.,  Paris 


Ecky,  John  H.,  Esq.,  Philadelphia 
Ellice,  Rt.  Hon.  Edward,  M.P.,  18,  Arling- 
ton-street 

Ellis,  Sir  Henry,  K.H.,  F.R.S.,  24, 
Bedford-square 

Elphinstone,  Lieut.,  3,  Chesham-place, 
Belgrave-square 
Ely,  Miss,  Philadelphia 
Emmet,  Dr.  Addis,  New  York 

Elagg,  Geo.  W.,  Esq.,  Charleston,  South 
Carolina 

Fletcher,  Wm.  Younger,  Esq.,  British 
Museum 

Foley,  Lord,  26,  Grosvenor-square 
Folsom,  Hon.  George,  New  York 
Foote,  John,  Esq. 

Force,  Colonel  Peter,  Washington,  U.S. 
Foreign  Office  (The) 

Forster,  John,  Esq.,  46,  Montague-square 
Fox,  General,  Addison-road,  Kensington 
Franck,  Mons.  A.,  Rue  Richelieu,  67,  Paris 
Frere,  W.  E.,  Esq. 

Galignani,  M.,  Paris 

Garnett,  Richard,  Esq.,  British  Museum 


Gladdish,  William,  Esq.,  Gravesend 
Glasgow  College 

Glendening,  Robert,  Esq.,  5,  Britain- st., 
Portsea 

Grant  & Farran,  Messrs.  21,  Ludgate-st. 
Gawler,  Colonel,  United  Service  Club 
Giraud,  R.  Herve,  Esq.,  Furnival’s-mn 
Graves,  Robert  Edmund,  Esq.,  British 
Museum 

Grey,  R.  W.,  Esq.,  M.P.,  47,  Belgrave-sq. 
Grylls,  Rev.  W. 

Guild,  G.  F.,  Esq.,  Boston,  U.S. 
Guillaume,  Mr.,  Chester-square 
Guise,  W.V., Esq.,  Elmore-ct.,  Gloucester 


Hale,  J.  H.,  Esq.,  Park-road,  Stockwell- 
eommon 

Harcourt,  Egerton,  Esq.,  Carlton  Gardens 

Harker,  Turner  James,  Esq.,  10,  North- 
ampton Park,  Islington 

Hawes,  Sir  Benjamin,  9,  Queen’s- 
square,  Westminster 

Hawkins,  Edward,  Esq.,  British  Museum 

Henderson,  Dr.,  6,  Curzon-st.,  Mayfair 

Hodgkin,  Thomas,  Esq.,  M.D.,  35,  Bed- 
ford-square 

Hollond,  R.,  Esq.,  M.P.,  63,  Portland-pl. 

Holmes,  James,  Esq.  4,  New  Ormond- 
street,  Foundling 

Home  Office  (The) 

Horner,  Rev.  J.  S.  H.,  Wells  Park, 
Somersetshire 

Howes,  John,  Esq.,  Chicago  (per  Messrs. 
Low) 

Hull  Subscription  Library 

Hunter,  David,  Esq.,  Blackness,  Dundee 


India  Office,  20  copies 

Jones,  J.  Winter,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  British 
Museum 

Jones,  W.  Bence,  Esq.,  Lisselan,  co.  Cork 
Jukes,  J.  B.,  Esq.,  51,  Stephen’s-green, 
Dublin 

Junior  United  Service  Club,  Charles-st., 
St.  James’s 


Kennedy,  Robt.  Lenox,  Esq.,  New  York 
Kerslake,  Mr.  T.,  Bristol 


Laird,  John,  Esq.,  Birkenhead 
Lansdowne,  the  Marquis  of,  54,  Berkeley- 
square 

Lavradio,  His  Excellency  the  Count  de, 
12,  Gloucester-place,  Portman-square 
Law,  William,  Esq.,  103,  Piccadilly 


7 


Leicester  Permanent  Library 
Lemon,  Sir  C.,  Bart.,  M.P.,  46,  Charles- 
street,  Berkeley-square 
Lenox,  James,  Esq.,  New  York 
Little  and  Brown,  Messrs.,  Boston,  U.S. 
Liverpool  Free  Public  Library 
Logan,  A.  J.,  Esq.,  Singapore 
London  Institution,  Finsbury  Circus 
Lott,  Capt.  E.  P.,  159,  Parliament-street, 
Liverpool 

London  Library,  12,  St.  James’s-square 
Lowe,  Bight  Hon.  Kobert.,  M.P.,  34, 
Lowndes-square 

Loyes,  Edw.,  Esq.,  33,  Paternoster-row 
Lyceum  Library,  Hull 

M’Calmont,  Bobt.,  Esq.,  30,  Eaton-square 
Mackenzie,  John  W.,  Esq.,  Edinburgh 
Macleay,  Geo.,  Esq.,  Brownhills,  New 
South  Wales 

Macready,  W.  C.,  Esq.,  Sherborne  House, 
Dorset 

Madan,  Capt.  Frederick,  H.C.S.,  5,  North- 
wick-terrace,  St.  John’s  Wood 
Madras  Literary  Society 
Major,  B.  H.,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  British 
Museum 

Malcolm,  W.  Elphinstone,  Esq.,  Bumfoot, 
Langholm,  Carlisle 
Mantel],  Walter,  Esq.,  New  Zealand 
Markham,  Clements  B.,  Esq.,  21,  Ec- 
cleston -square 

Marlborough,  His  Grace  the  Duke  of, 
Blenheim 

Marsh,  Hon.  George  P.,  Constantinople 
Massie,  Captain  T.  L.,  B.N.,  Chester 
Melbourne,  Public  Library  of,  per  Mr. 
Guillaume 

Muller,  F.,  Esq.,  Amsterdam 

Munich  Boyal  Library 

Murchison,  Sir  Boderick  Impey,  F.B.S. 

&c.,  16,  Belgrave-square 
Murphy,  Hon.  C.  H.,  Brooklyn,  New  York 
Murray,  John,  Esq.,  Albemarle-street 

Newcastle-upon-Tyne  Literary  and  Sci- 
entific Institute 

Newman,  Mr.  James,  13,  York  place, 
Kentish  Town 

New  York  Mercantile  Library 
Nicholson,  Sir  C.  D.  E.  L.,  New  South 
Wales 

Nimmo,  Thomas,  Esq.,  Demerara 
Norris,  Edwin,  Esq.,  Sec.  Asiatic  Society, 
5,  New  Burlington-street 
Norton,  C.  B.,  Esq.,  New  York 

Oriental  Club,  Hanover-square 
Ouvry,  F.,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  66,  Lincoln’s  Inn 
Fields 


Paine,  W.  Dunkley,  Esq.,  Cockshutt- 
Hill,  Beigate 

Parker,  J.  W.,  Esq.,  West  Strand 
Parliament  Library,  Toronto 
Pasley,  Major-General  Sir  C.  W.,  K.C.B., 
12,  Norfolk  Crescent,  Hyde  Park 
Peacock,  George,  Esq. 

Peacock,  Septimus,  Esq.,  Alexandria 
Pemberton,  Mrs. 

Pennington,  John,  Esq.,  Philadelphia 
Pennsylvania,  Historical  Society  of 
Perry,  Sir  Erskine,  M.P.,  Eaton-place 
Petit,  Bev.  J.  Louis,  the  Uplands,  ShifFnal 
Petit,  Miss 

Phillimore,  Charles  B.,  Esq.,  6,  Green- 
street,  Grosvenor-square 
Platt,  T.  Clayton,  Esq.,  Philadelphia 
Plowden,  W.  H.  Chicheley,  Esq.,  F.B.S. 
Portland,  His  Grace  the  Duke  of 
Portsmouth,  the  Boyal  Naval  College 
Pourtales,  Count  Albert,  Berlin 
Powis,  Earl  of,  45,  Berkeley-square 
Prescott,  Bear  H.,  Admiral  C.B.,  United 
Service  Club 

Putnam,  G.  B.,  Esq.,  New  York 

Quaritch,  Mr.,  15,  Piccadilly 

Bawlinsou,  Sir  H.,  K.C.B.,  Athenaeum 
Club 

Beed,  F.  J.  Esq.,  34,  Bedi'ord-square 
Bichard,  John  E.,  Esq.,  Wandsworth, 
Surrey 

Bichards,  Thomas,  Esq.,  4,  St.  Alban’s- 
road,  Kensington 

Bichardson,  Sir  John,  M.D.,  F.B.S. 
Bichardson,  Balph,  Esq.,  Greenfield  Hall, 
Holywell,  Flintshire 
Biggs,  G.  W.,  Esq.,  Washington,  U.S. 
Bobinson,  Capt.  Walter  F.,B.N.,F.B.G.S., 
Junior  United  Service  Club 
Boyal  Geographical  Society,  3,  Waterloo- 
place 

Boyal  Society,  Burlington  House 
Boys,  Thos.  Wm.,  Esq.,  Southampton, 
Long  Island,  New  York 
Bowsell,  E.  P.,  Esq.,  29,  Finsbury-circus 
Bumbold,  C.  E.,  Esq.,  1,  Eccleston-square 
Bushout,  Miss,  Tetbury 
Bye,  W.  B.,  Esq.,  British  Museum 

Scarth,  J.,  Esq.,  Canton 
Schomburgk,  Sir  Bobert,  Bangkok 
Sedgwick,  the  Bev.  Adam,  Woodwardian 
Professor,  Cambridge 
Sheffield,  Earl  of,  20,  Portland -pi ace 
Shillinglaw,  — , Esq.,  Admiralty 
Shrewsbury,  Earl  of 
Simpson,  Lieutenant 
Singapore  Library 


8 


Smith,  Edmund,  Esq.,  Hull 
Smith,  George,  Esq.,  21,  Russell-square 
Smith,  J.,  Esq.,  5,  Cavendish-square 
Somers,  Earl,  33,  Princes-gate,  Hyde 
Park 

Stanford,  Mr.  E.,  Charing-cross 
Stanley  of  Alderley,  Lord 
Stanley,  Hon.  Henry  E.  J. 

Stuart,  Alexander,  Esq.,  New  York 
St.  Andrew’s  University 
St.  David’s,  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord 
Bishop  of,  Abergwili,  Carmarthenshire 
St.  Petersburg,  Imperial  Library  of 
Stevens,  H.,  Esq.,  Boston,  United  States 
Stockholm,  Royal  Library  of  (per  Messrs. 
Longman  and  Co. 

Stirling,  Wm.,  Esq.,  of  Keir,  128,Park-st. 
Stubbs,  Lieut.,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  Edgar 
Stuart,  R.  L.,  Esq.,  New  York 


Taunton,  Lord,  27,  Belgrave-square 
Ternaux-Compans,  Mons.  H.,  Paris 
Thompson,  Thos.,  Esq.,  Solicitor,  Hull 
Thomas,  W.  A.,  Esq.,  50,  Threadneedle- 
street 

Tolstoy,  George,  Esq.,  St.  Petersburgh 
Trade,  the  Board  of,  Whitehall 
Travellers’  Club,  106,  Pall  Mall 
Trinity  House,  Tower  Hill 


Union  Society,  Oxford 

United  Service  Institution,  Scotland-yard 

Upham  & Beet,  Messrs. 46,  New  Bond-st. 


Victoria  Library  and  Reading  Rooms, 
Hong  Kong 

Vienna  Imperial  Library 
Virginia  State  Library 


Vivian,  Geo.,  Esq.,  11,  Upper  Grosvenor- 
street 

Van  Ryckevorsel,  H.,  Consul  de  Venezuela, 
Conseiller  a la  Regence  de  Rotterdam 


Waite,  Henry,  Esq.,  68,  Old  Broad  street 
Wales,  George  Washington,  Boston,  U.S. 
Walker,  J.,  Esq.,  31,  Keppel-street 
Walker,  Joshua,  Esq.,  Jun.,  59,  Upper 
Brunswick-place,  Brighton 
Waters,  J.  S.,  Esq.,  Baltimore,  U.S. 
Watts,  Thomas,  Esq.,  British  Museum 
Weir,  William,  Esq.,  30,  Great  Coram-st. 
Wensleydale,  the  Rt.  Hon.  Lord,  56, 
Park-street,  Grosvenor-square 
Whewell,  the  Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  Master  of 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge 
White,  R.,  Esq.,  CoWss,  Isle  of  Wight 
Whiteman,  J.  C..  Esq.,  Theydon  Grove, 
Epping 

Wilkinson,  John,  Esq.,  3,  Wellington-st., 
Strand 

Willis  and  Sotheran,  Messrs.,  Strand 
Williams, T., Esq., Northumberland-house, 
Strand 

Wilson,  Edward  S.,  Esq.,  Hull 
Wolff,  H.  Drummond,  Esq.,  44,  Half- 
moon-st.,  Piccadilly 

Woodd,  Basil  T.,Esq.,  Conyngbam  Hall, 
Naresborough 

Wood,  Lieutenant  John,  H.E.I.C.S.,  137, 
Leadenhall-street 
Woods,  Samuel,  Esq.,  Australia 
Wright,  H.,  Esq.,  Cheltenham 
Wyld,  James,  Esq.,  Strand 


Young,  Capt.  Allen,  Riversdale*  Twick- 
enham 

Young,  G.  E.,  Esq.,  80,  Cornhill 


RICHARDS,  PKIHTER,  37,  GREAT  QUEEN  STREET. 


WORKS  ISSUED  BY 

Clje  feafclugt  ^ociftg. 


THE  EXPEDITION  OF  PEDRO  DE  URSUA 
AND  LOPE  DE  AGUIRRE. 


M.DCCC.LNI. 


PEDRO  DE  URSTJA 


LOPE  DE  AGUIRRE 


— — — 


Fv  1 

n/x 

L l 

© k 

H | 

f il  A 

V |3  \/\ 
/ ' 

A it 

n.  X%-/- 

TT\  T\ 

If  AA 

yj\  / \ z , 

{ o 

THE  EXPEDITION 


OF 

PEDHO  DE  URSUA  & LOPE  DE  AGUIRRE 

IN  SEARCH  OF 

EL  DORADO  AND  OMAGUA 

in  1560-1. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  FRAY  PEDRO  SIMON’S  “ SIXTH  HISTORICAL  NOTICE  OF  THE 
CONQUEST  OF  TIERRA  FIRME.” 


BY 


WILLIAM  BOLLAERT,  Esq.,  F.R.G.S., 

CORE.  MEM.  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CHILE  ; MEMBER  OF  THE 
ETHNOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  OF  NEW  YORK. 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION 


BY 

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  ESQ. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY. 


M.DCCC.LXI. 


London: 


T.  RICHARDS,  37,  GREAT  QUEEN  STREET. 


THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY. 


SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON,  G.C.StS.,  F.R.S.,  D.C.L.,  Corr.  Mem.  Inst.  F., 
Hon.  Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  St.  Petersburg,  &c.,  &c.,  President. 

The  MARQUIS  OF  LANSDOWNE  ) „ 

\ Vice-Presidents. 

Rear-Admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATER  BETHUNE,  C.B. ) 

CHARLES  F.  BEKE,  Esq.,  Phil.D. 

Rt.  Hon.  LORD  BROUGHTON. 

The  LORD  ALFRED  SPENCER  CHURCHILL,  M.P. 

CHARLES  WENTWORTH  DILKE,  Esq. 

Rt.  Hon.  Sir  DAVID  DUNDAS. 

Sir  HENRY  ELLIS,  K.H.,  F.R.S. 

JOHN  FORSTER,  Esq. 

R.  W.  GREY,  Esq. 

T.  HODGKIN,  Esq.,  M.D. 

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A. 

His  Excellency  the  COUNT  DE  LAVRADIO. 

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A. 

Sir  HENRY  RAWLINSON,  K.C.B. 

The  Rev.  W.  WHEWELL. 


CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  Esq.,  Honorary  Secretary. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


Introduction  .......  i 


CHAPTER  I. 

1.  Gives  a brief  account  of  the  deeds  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  before  his 
arrival  in  Peru,  and  of  his  entrance  into  that  country. — 2.  Certain 
Brazilian  Indians  give  information  in  Peru,  of  very  rich  provinces 
near  the  river  Maranon. — 3.  The  marquis  of  Canete  determines  to 
send  Pedro  de  Ursua  to  explore  them,  and  summons  him  to  his 
presence. — 4.  Various  opinions  are  formed  in  Peru  respecting  this 
expedition  .......  1 


CHAPTER  II. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  builds  the  brigantines  for  the  expedition,  and  makes 
Pedro  de  Ramiro  his  lieutenant-general. — 2.  Ursua  leaves  Lima  with 
his  people  ; he  arrives  at  the  town  of  Moyobamba. — 3.  How  he  con- 
trives to  obtain  two  thousand  dollars  from  the  cura  or  priest  of  the 
place. — 4.  Ursua  sends  part  of  his  people  from  the  Motilones  to  other 
provinces,  where  they  provide  for  themselves  . . .5 

CHAPTER  III. 

1.  Arles  and  Frias  are  displeased  at  having  Ramiro  among  them  ; 
they  determine  to  kill  him. — 2.  They  kill  Ramiro. — 3.  The  governor 
Ursua  goes  in  person  to  arrest  the  delinquents. — 4.  He  sends  them  to 
Santa  Cruz,  where  they  are  beheaded  . . . .8 

CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  People  in  Peru  are  fearful  of  mutiny  in  Ursua’s  expedition  ; a friend 
writes  to  him  on  the  subject. — 2.  The  governor  sends  two  parties  of 
soldiers  in  search  of  provisions  ; one  of  these,  composed  of  thirty  men, 
goes  down  the  river  more  than  two  hundred  leagues. — 3.  Garcia  del 
Arze  and  his  soldiers  fortify  themselves  on  an  island  against  the 
Indians. — 4.  The  Spaniards  are  most  cruel  to  the  natives  who  come 
peacefully  to  them  . . . . . .12 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 

1.  Juan  de  Vargas  commences  his  voyage  ; arrives  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Cocama. — 2.  He  remains  here  until  Ursua  arrives. — 3.  The  brigantines 
spring  a leak  when  launched,  which  is  unfortunate  for  the  expedition. 
— 4.  Ursua  descends  the  river  with  all  his  people,  arriving  at  the  pro- 
vince of  the  Caperuzos. — 5.  He  sends  a brigantine  to  advise  Juan  de 
Vargas  of  his  coming  . . . . . .16 


CHAPTER  VI. 

1.  From  the  river  Bracamoras  the  governor  continues  his  voyage  to  that 
of  Cocama,  where  he  finds  Juan  de  Vargas  with  his  party. — 2.  They 
continue  their  voyage,  some  of  their  necessities  in  the  way  of  food  being 
supplied  by  the  hicoteas  and  their  eggs. — 3.  They  arrive  at  the  island 
where  Garcia  del  Arze  and  his  soldiers  are. — 4.  They  find  some  islands 
lower  down  the  river,  with  villages,  but  no  inhabitants,  for  they  had 
abandoned  them  . . . . . . .20 


CHAPTER  VII. 

1.  The  Indians  come  out  to  see  the  expedition  from  a distance,  and  a 
chief  comes  with  offers  of  peace. — 2.  The  Indians  come  from  the  pro- 
vince of  Carari  with  some  provisions,  which  they  barter  for  trinkets.— 

3.  The  governor  sends  an  officer  to  examine  the  country  inland.— 

4.  Punishments  which  Pedro  de  Ursua  inflicted  on  his  people. — 

5.  Opinions  entertained  respecting  this  province,  whether  there  were 

one  or  two  . . . . . . .24 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  continues  his  course  through  a desert  region,  where 
his  people  suffer  from  want. — 2.  They  establish  themselves  in  a 
village,  where  they  make  up  for  past  want  by  a large  supply  of  pro- 
visions.— 3.  The  governor,  on  account  of  the  plentiful  supplies, 
determines  to  encamp  in  the  village,  pass  Christmas  there,  and  make 
inquiries  respecting  the  land  for  which  they  are  searching. — 4.  Fifty 
Spaniards  depart  to  assist  the  chief  of  Machiparo,  against  two  hundred 
hostile  Indians  . . . . . . .29 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  names  a provisor  or  vicar-general  for  his  fleet, 
believing  he  had  power  to  do  so. — Some  grow  faint  hearted  at  the 
continuation  of  the  expedition,  and  the  governor  encourages  them  to 
proceed. — 3.  Excuses  which  the  mutineers  make  to  Pedro  de  Ursua 
for  their  delinquencies. — 4.  The  mutineers  conspire  to  rid  themselves 
of  the  government  of  Ursua,  and  to  make  Hon  Fernando  de  Guzman 
his  successor  . . . . . . ,34 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  The  mutineers  determine  to  kill  the  governor,  Pedro  de  Ursua,  and 
to  return  to  Peru. — 2.  Mysterious  warning  of  the  death  of  Ursua, 
which  was  seen  and  heard  by  a knight  of  the  order  of  San  Juan. — 
3.  They  continue  their  course  from  this  village  to  another  lower  down, 
of  the  same  name.  A slave  of  one  of  the  mutineers  discovers  their 
design,  and  attempts  to  warn  the  governor. — 4.  The  mutineers  kill 
the  governor  Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  his  lieutenant  . . 38 

CHAPTER  XI. 

THE  CRUISE  OP  THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 

1.  The  governor  being  dead,  the  rebels  endeavour  to  bring  all  the 
expedition  to  their  side. — 2.  They  do  not  allow  the  soldiers  to  leave 
their  quarters  during  the  night,  to  prevent  them  from  conferring 
together. — 3.  The  murderers  divide  the  various  offices  among  them- 
selves.— 4.  They  continue  the  division  of  offices.  Sancho  Pizarro 
returns  ........  43 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  The  new  general,  Don  Fernando,  calls  a council  to  discuss  matters 
relative  to  the  projected  discovery  of  the  new  lands  of  the  Dorado. — 

2.  He  has  a document  made  out  for  their  security,  and  orders  all  to 
sign  it.  Lope  de  Aguirre  signs  it,  adding  the  word  “traitor.” — 

3.  Aguirre  publicly  explains  why  he  did  so. — 4.  Juan  Alonzo  de  la 

Bandera  replies,  saying  that  those  who  killed  the  governor  were  not 
traitors  ........  47 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  They  leave  the  village  (Machiparo)  where  they  had  killed  Ursua,  and, 
going  down  the  river,  arrive  at  another  village,  where  they  commence 
building  brigantines. — 2.  They  suffer  so  much  from  hunger  in  this 
village,  that  they  are  obliged  to  eat  horses  and  dogs. — 3.  Aguirre  kills 
Captain  del  Arze,  because  he  was  a friend  of  Uriua’s,  siezes  Diego  de 
Belcazar  for  the  same  cause,  and  has  two  others  strangled. — 4.  Don 
Fernando  takes  away  the  office  of  maestro  del  campo  from  Lope 
de  Aguirre,  and  gives  it  to  Juan  Alonzo  de  la  Bandera,  his  lieutenant- 
general  . . . . . . . .51 

CHAPTER  XIY. 

1.  Don  Fernando  comes  to  an  understanding  with  Lope  de  Aguirre,  and 
promises  to  restore  him  to  his  post  of  maestro  del  campo. — 2.  The 
governor  and  Aguirre  become  friends,  the  enmity  of  the  latter  in- 
creases against  Bandera. — 3.  Aguirre  calumniates  Bandera  before  the 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


governor,  saying  he  wished  to  kill  the  governor,  and  rebel. — 4.  Aguirre 
kills  Bandera,  and  one  Christoval  Hernandez,  at  the  governor’s 
house  ........  56 


CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  The  soldiers  irritate  the  Indians,  who  bring  provisions  for  them,  when 
some  Spaniards  are  killed. — 2.  Owing  to  these  proceedings  the 
Spaniards  suffer  great  privations,  on  account  of  the  fear  the  Indians 
have  of  coming  near  them. — 3.  Aguirre  succeeds  in  gaining  the  con- 
fidence of  Don  Fernando  for  his  own  particular  ends. — 4.  Don 
Fernando  plans  how  to  discover  the  real  sentiments  of  the  soldiers, 
and  their  devotion  to  him,  and  how  he  suceeeds  . . 60 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

1.  Don  Fernando  thanks  them  for  his  new  election,  and  makes  it  known 
that  he  will  not  force  any  one  to  follow  him. — 2.  He  asks  the 
soldiers  to  take  an  oath  to  follow  him,  and  all  promise  to  do  so,  except 
three. — 3.  They  all  take  the  oath  on  a missal  placed  on  an  altar. — 
4.  Difficulties  that  occur  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  employment 
for  the  people,  at  this  spot  . . . . .64 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

1.  Aguirre  addresses  the  soldiers. — 2.  He,  together  with  the  soldiers, 
proclaims  Fernando  de  Guzman  Prince  of  Piru. — 3.  Don  Fernando 
accepts  the  title  of  Prince,  and  sets  up  an  establishment  accordingly. 
— 4.  Don  Fernando  takes  the  office  of  sargento  major  from  Sancho 
Pizarro  (a  friend  of  Ursua’s)  and  gives  it  to  Martin  Perez  . 68 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

1.  Various  projects  regarding  their  journey  to  Piru. — 2.  The  plans  they 
intend  to  adopt  on  their  arrival  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  Panamd,  and 
Piru  : Don  Fernando  bestows  titles  for  Encomiendas. — 3.  The  vile 
doings  of  other  traitors. — 4.  After  three  months,  the  brigantines  being 
ready,  they  leave  this  village  and  prosecute  their  voyage  . 72 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

I.  They  arrive  at  an  Indian  village,  where  they  pass  Passion  week  and 
Easter  ; Aguirre  causes  a soldier  to  be  strangled. — 2.  They  depart 
after  Easter,  and  stop  at  another  very  large  Indian  town,  where  they 
find  abundance  of  provisions  and  wine  (chicha). — 3.  Some  customs  of 
the  Indians  of  this  place. — 4.  How  they  arranged  to  obtain  pro- 
visions here  ; and  how  some  scruples  occur  to  Don  Fernando  and  his 
friends  . ......  77 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  Hon  Fernando  calls  a council,  in  which  it  is  determined  to  kill  Aguirre 
as  it  seemed  necessary  to  do  so.— 2.  Aguirre  and  his  friends  get  more 
arms,  taking  them  from  the  rest. — 3.  He  divides  the  soldiers  into 
companies,  such  an  arrangement  appearing  to  him  better  for  his 
designs. — 4.  Aguirre  arrests  Gonzalo  Huarte,  Hon  Fernando’s  mayor- 
domo,  with  the  intention  of  killing  him,  but  afterwards  they  become 
friends  ........  81 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

1.  Hifficulties  between  Captain  Lorenzo  Salduendo  and  Aguirre,  as  to 
the  accommodation  for  Hona  Ines  on  board  the  brigantines. — 2.  Aguirre 
kills  Salduendo,  and  by  his  orders  two  soldiers  kill  Hona  Ines. — 3. 
Hiscussion  between  Hon  Fernando  and  Aguirre  as  to  the  death  of 
Salduendo. — 4.  Aguirre  pacifies  Hon  Fernando,  but,  on  account  of  an 
idle  report  which  two  captains  repeat  to  Aguirre,  he  determines  to  kill 
Hon  Fernando  . . . . . . .85 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

1.  Aguirre  makes  his  arrangements  to  kill  the  Prince  Hon  Fernando 
and  others. — 2.  Aguirre  and  his  companions  kill  two  captains,  and 
plan  how  the  Prince  is  to  die. — 3.  They  go  in  the  morning  of  the  next 
day  to  kill  the  Prince. — 4.  Aguirre  kills  a priest,  some  captains,  and 
the  Prince  Hon  Fernando  , . . . .90 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

1.  Aguirre  explains  the  cause  of  the  death  of  the  governor  and  the 
others  to  the  camp,  and  calls  his  soldiers  the  “ Marahones”. — 2.  He 
changes  the  various  offices  in  the  army,  giving  them  to  his  friends. — 
3.  They  leave  the  town  of  the  “ Butchery”,  and  sail  through  large 
provinces. — 4.  After  navigating  for  twelve  days  they  come  to  a 
village  .......  .93 


CHAPTER  XXIY. 

1.  They  catch  an  Indian  and  send  him  to  tell  the  others  that  they  desire 
to  be  at  peace  with  them. — 2.  Aguirre  kills  three  soldiers,  whilst  they 
are  putting  the  brigantines  in  order. — 3.  He  still  has  tyrannical  fears, 
although  he  has  killed  so  many  men. — 4.  The  Brazilian  Indian  guides 
escape  from  him  . . . , . . .99 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

1,  Going  down  the  river,  they  fall  in  with  some  strongly  built  houses, 
where  they  find  cakes  of  salt. — 2.  Huring  the  voyage  they  pass  many 
islands,  and  on  one  of  them  they  leave  the  greater  number  of  Indian 

b 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


servants,  whom  they  had  brought  with  them. — 3.  They  continue  the 
voyage  under  many  difficulties.  For  a trifling  affair  Aguirre  has  two 
soldiers  strangled. — 4.  He  loses  a piragua,  with  three  Spaniards  and 
some  Indians ; and  others  are  drowned,  gathering  shell-fish  , 103 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

1.  The  first  Spaniard  who  sailed  out  of  the  mouth  of  this  river,  was 
Captain  Franciso  de  Orellana.  Its  banks  are  not  well  peopled. 
— 2.  Character,  climate,  and  people  of  this  river,  from  its  sources  to 
where  it  enters  the  sea. — 3.  There  are  more  than  two  thousand  islands 
near  to  the  mouth  of  the  river. — 4.  Lope  de  Aguirre,  finding  himself 
out  at  sea,  sails  for  the  island  of  Margarita,  where  he  arrives  and 
lands,  having  first  killed  two  soldiers  in  the  brigantine  . . 107 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

1.  The  maestro  del  campo,  having  received  Aguirre’s  orders,  departs,  and 
strangles  Sancho  Pizarro  on  the  road. — 2.  A piragua  with  Indians  is 
sent  from  the  port  of  Margarita,  to  examine  the  brigantines  of  Aguirre, 
and  a party  of  soldiers  visit  him. — 3.  The  Margarita  people  give 
Aguirre  two  bullocks,  and  he  recompenses  them. — 4.  The  governor, 
on  account  of  a letter  received  from  Aguirre,  decides  upon  visiting 
him,  accompanied  by  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city. — 5.  The 
governor  offers  him  hospitality.  The  traitor  marshals  his  armed  men 
before  the  governor  . . . . . .113 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

1.  Aguirre  makes  prisoners  of  the  governor,  alcalde,  and  their  compan- 
ions.— 2.  All  the  traitors  march  towards  the  city  with  the  governor  ; 
the  maestro  del  campo  takes  possession  of  the  city,  in  the  name  of 
Aguirre. — 3.  Aguirre  enters  the  city,  and  robs  the  royal  treasury. — 
4.  He  continues  his  insolence  by  a thousand  threats  . .117 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

1 . For  the  love  of  a roving  life,  like  that  which  the  traitors  led,  some 
soldiers  of  the  island  join  them,  which  causes  no  little  detriment. — 2. 
Aguirre  sends  to  take  a ship  that  was  in  Maracapana,  belonging  to 
the  Provincial  of  Santo  Domingo,  but  fails. — 3.  The  Provincial  of 
Santo  Domingo  determines  to  go  in  his  ship,  to  the  port  of  Burburata, 
and  other  parts,  to  give  notice  of  the  proceedings  of  Aguirre. — 4. 
Aguirre  addresses  the  people  of  the  island  with  feigned  words,  and 
even  with  lies  .......  122 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

1.  Aguirre  kills  one  of  his  captains.  Four  of  his  soldiers  desert. — 2.  Two 
of  the  deserters  found  ; Aguirre  orders  them  to  be  hung.  He  intends 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


to  kill  a monk  of  the  order  of  Santo  Domingo. — 3.  Aguirre  informs  his 
soldiers  how  he  intends  to  proceed  in  his  tyrannies. — 4.  He  places  his 
brigantines  with  their  bows  towards  the  shore,  fearing  that  his  soldiers 
might  desert;  and  he  destroys  the  houses  and  estates  of  an  inhabitant 
who  had  fled  .......  127 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

1.  Aguirre  kills  a captain,  named  Juan  de  Turriaga,  and  buries  him  with 
pomp. — 2.  Aguirre  threatens  the  people  of  Margarita  with  his  ven- 
geance, in  case  the  provincial  of  Santo  Domingo  takes  his  men  in 
Maracapana. — 3.  The  provincial’s  ship  is  seen  making  for  the  island, 
the  traitor  prepares  for  defence. — 4.  Aguirre,  observing  that  the  pro- 
vincial’s ship  had  anchored,  puts  the  inhabitants  into  the/ort,  as  prison- 
ers, and  determines  to  kill  the  governor  and  his  companions  . 131 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

1.  Aguirre  arranges  for  the  execution  of  the  governor  and  his  com- 
panions in  captivity. — 2.  They  kill  the  governor  and  his  companions. 
Aguirre  summons  his  soldiers  to  see  the  dead  bodies,  and  makes  his 
observations  on  the  matter. — 3.  He  explains,  and  gives  his  reasons 
for  their  death. — 4.  Aguirre  orders  the  bodies  to  be  buried,  and  sends 
the  inhabitants  back  to  prison.  He  leaves  his  maestro  del  campo  in 
charge  of  the  city,  and  then  sallies  forth  against  the  governor  . 136 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

1 . The  people  of  the  port  of  Burburata  send  tidings  to  the  governor  of 
Venezuela,  and  other  cities  of  his  government,  and  that  of  Merida,  con- 
cerning the  acts  of  the  traitor. — 2.  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina  sends 
information  to  the  Royal  Audience  of  Santa  Fe,  and  to  the  other 
cities  on  the  road. — 3.  Preparations  are  made  by  Pedro  Bravo  de 
la  Molina,  in  the  city  of  Merida,  to  resist  the  traitor,  if  necessary. — 
4.  The  licenciate,  Pablo  Collado,  is  not  unmindful  of  his  duties,  in  the 
towns  under  his  government  . . . . .139 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

1.  Preparations  ordered  by  the  Royal  Audience  of  Santa  Fe,  and  officers 
appointed. — 2.  Orders  are  issued  that  the  people  of  the  various  cities 
of  the  kingdom  shall  be  ready  for  all  exigencies,  and  what  the 
governor  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina  has  to  do  in  Merida. — 3.  The 
governments  of  Popayan,  Santa  Martha,  and  Carthagena,  are  ordered 
to  collect  troops,  and  various  opinions  as  to  sallying  forth  against  the 
traitor. — 4.  Investigations  are  made,  to  see  if  there  are,  in  the  king- 
dom, any  soldiers  connected  with  the  Peruvian  mutineers.  The  royal 
seal  guarded  in  Santa  Fe  . . . . . .142 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

1.  Aguirre  marches  with  his  soldiers  to  Punta  de  Piedras,  whence  he 
returns  to  the  city.  He  is  told  unfavourable  things  of  his  maestro  del 
campo. — 2.  Aguirre  has  his  maestro  del  campo  killed  in  the  fortress. 
Some  prisoners  escape. — 3.  A horrible  thing  occurs  to  one  Llamoso, 
relative  to  the  body  of  the  maestro  del  campo. — The  Maranones  and 
soldiers  of  the  provincial  see  one  another  . . .147 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

1.  Lope  de  Aguirre  writes  to  the  provincial. — 2.  The  provincial  replies 
from  his  ship,  and  then  sets  sail.  Aguirre  hangs  two  soldiers. — 
3.  Opinions  as  to  whether  it  was  politic  of  the  provincial  to  com- 
municate with  the  traitor. — 4.  The  opinions  and  objections  re- 
solved ........  151 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

1.  Aguirre  prepares  to  leave  the  island,  and  kills  a soldier. — 2.  He  has 
flags  made,  and  blessed  in  the  church,  on  the  feast  of  our  Lady  of 
Assumption. — 3.  Aguirre  makes  an  oration  to  his  captains  and 
ensigns  on  giving  them  the  flags. — 4.  A soldier  escapes  from  Aguirre, 
on  account  of  which  he  kills  two  others,  also  a woman  . .156 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

1.  Aguirre  orders  an  old  man  to  be  killed  ; he  likewise  does  the  same  to 
a friar  of  Santo  Domingo.  He  also  commands  another  friar  to  be 
killed,  to  whom  he  had  confessed. — >2.  Of  another  who  was  strangled, 
which  caused  much  sorrow  in  the  town. — 3.  The  traitor  hangs  an  old 
man  and  a woman  ; he  also  does  ridiculous  things  to  some  soldiers. — 
4.  One  Francisco  Taxardo  comes  to  the  island  of  Margarita  from 
Caraccas,  with  some  people,  with  the  intention  of  routing  Aguirre  160 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

1.  Aguirre  embarks  with  all  his  people,  and,  while  doing  so,  he  causes 
his  admiral  to  be  killed. — 2.  The  traitor  sails,  but  changes  his  route, 
by  going  to  the  port  of  Burburata. — 3.  He  is  becalmed,  which  retards 
his  voyage — 4.  They  burn  a ship  they  find  in  the  port,  and  the  in- 
habitants advise  the  governor  of  Venezuela  of  Aguirre’s  arrival  165 

CHAPTER  XL. 

1.  Garcia  de  Paredes  goes  from  Merida  to  Tocuyo  with  some  followers, 
sent  by  the  governor. — 2.  The  governor  of  Venezuela  sends  to  the 
governor  and  inhabitants  of  Merida,  to  come  and  assist  him. — 3.  The 
governor  of  Merida  goes  with  twenty-five  soldiers  to  Tocuyo. — 
4.  Aguirre’s  men  find  a pilot  in  the  town  of  Burburata,  who  was  one 
of  those  who  had  passed  over  to  the  provincial  . . .169 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

1.  Aguirre  is  informed  that  some  soldiers,  who  were  friendly  to  him,  are 
in  that  part  of  the  country.  He  sends  in  search  of  them. — 2.  The 
traitor  kills  a soldier.  He  burns  his  vessels,  and  takes  up  his  quarters 
in  the  town. — 3.  The  soldiers  look  about  for  horses,  so  as  to  sally 
forth  with  them.  The  traitor  declares  war  against  the  king  of 
Castille. — 4.  The  whole  country  is  in  a state  of  ferment  ; the  rob- 
beries of  the  soldiers  ; they  find  the  alcalde,  and  a tradesman  of  the 
town.  Aguirre  sends  to  the  town  of  Valencia  for  horses  . 173 

CHAPTER  XLII. 

] . Aguirre  kills  a tradesman,  also  a soldier,  in  this  town  of  Burburata. 
— 2.  Two  of  his  soldiers  desert  from  him.  He  begins  his  march  on 
foot,  for  want  of  horses. — 3.  Aguirre  leaves  his  camp  on  the  road, 
and  returns  to  Burburata,  where  he  gets  drunk  with  his  companions  ; 
three  desert. — 4.  Disturbances  in  the  camp  whilst  Aguirre  was  at 
Burburata,  two  soldiers  are  killed. — 5.  Opinion  among  the  Maranones 
relative  to  the  death  of  one.  The  tyrant  is  informed  of  what  had 
happened,  and  returns  to  the  camp  . . .177 

CHAPTER  XLIII. 

1.  Aguirre  marches,  but  with  much  trouble,  towards  Valencia.  He 
becomes  ill  on  the  march. — 2.  They  arrive  at  Valencia,  and  find  it 
deserted  by  the  inhabitants.  Aguirre  becomes  worse,  but  recovers, 
and  then  kills  a soldier. — 3.  The  alcalde,  Chaves,  takes  two  soldiers  in 
Burburata,  and  sends  information  to  Aguirre  ; one  of  them  runs  away. 
— 4.  The  traitor  manages  to  lay  hands  on  the  inhabitants  of  Valencia, 
and  on  another  soldier  ......  182 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

1.  The  traitor  allows  the  priest  of  Margarita  to  return  to  his  dwelling, 
on  condition  that  he  forwards  a letter  that  Aguirre  had  written  to  the 
king. — 2.  The  alcalde  of  Burburata  informs  the  traitor,  as  to  the  pre- 
parations the  governor  is  making  to  oppose  him.  Aguirre  kills  three 
soldiers. — 3.  A sentinel  informs  the  town  of  Barquicimeto,  that 
Aguirre  is  marching  on  it ; the  inhabitants  fly. — 4.  Ten  of  Aguirre’s 
soldiers  desert  on  the  march,  at  which  he  becomes  very  wrath,  and 
utters  ten  thousand  blasphemies,  as  was  his  custom  . . 187 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

1.  Aguirre,  marching  from  Valencia  to  Barquicimeto,  comes  to  a 
mining  settlement,  where  he  falls  into  some  trouble. — 2.  The  traitor 
advances  to  the  river  of  the  valley  of  Damas,  where  he  rests  a day. — • 
3.  Here  he  determines  to  kill  some  of  his  men,  but  he  does  not  do  so. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


One  of  his  captains  comes  from  Margarita  to  Barquicimeto,  and  gives 
information  as  to  Aguirre’s  forces. — 4.  The  maestro  del  campo,  Diego 
Garcia  de  Paredes,  reconnoitres  the  forces  of  the  traitor  . 197 

CHAPTER  XLYI. 

1.  The  maestro  del  campo,  in  a narrow  part  of  the  road,  unexpectedly 
finds  himself  in  Aguirre’s  camp.  Both  parties  retire. — 2.  The  general 
Pena  takes  letters  of  pardon  from  the  governor,  for  Aguirre  and  his 
soldiers. — 3.  The  king’s  party  determine  to  await  Aguirre’s  attack 
upon  the  town.  Aguirre  writes  a letter  of  promises  and  threats. — 4. 
The  traitor’s  party  show  themselves  to  those  in  the  town,  but  no  action 
ensues  ........  202 

CHAPTER  XLVII. 

1.  Garcia  de  Paredes  lays  hands  on  some  clothes  and  ammunition  be- 
longing to  the  traitor.  His  soldiers  find  the  letters  of  pardon. — 
2.  Aguirre  talks  to  them  on  the  subject,  they  decide  on  following  him. 
— 3.  Aguirre  sets  fire  to  the  town.  The  maestro  del  campo  fires  into 
the  enemy’s  camp.  This  vexes  Aguirre. — 4.  Pedro  Bravo  de  la 
Molina  arrives  with  men  from  Merida,  where  the  governor  had  made 
him  his  lieutenant-general  .....  207 

CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

1 . Bravo  accepts  the  posts  conferred  on  him  by  the  governor  ; they  all 
leave  Tocuyo  for  the  king’s  camp. — 2.  Aguirre’s  letter  to  the  governor, 
Pablo  Collado. — 3.  Those  from  Tocuyo  join  the  king’s  forces,  when 
victory  over  the  traitor  is  anticipated. — 4.  Two  of  Aguirre’s  soldiers 
desert  to  the  king’s  side.  The  maestro  del  campo  and  captain  Bravo 
catch  some  Indians  belonging  to  the  Maranones  . .211 

CHAPTER  XLIX. 

1.  Aguirre  sends  sixty  arquebusiers  to  fire  into  the  king’s  camp  at  night, 
but  without  any  result. — 2.  The  traitor  comes  out  to  the  aid  of  his 
men,  and  prepares  to  resist  the  royalists. — 3.  Aguirre’s  fire  makes 
no  impression  on  the  royalists.  Captain  Diego  Tirado  deserts  from 
the  traitor. — 4.  Another  soldier  tries  to  desert  to  the  royalists.  A 
mounted  soldier  of  the  king’s  party  makes  the  circuit  of  Aguirre’s 
entrenchment  .......  216 

CHAPTER  L. 

1.  Aguirre,  having  fears  of  the  desertion  of  his  men,  retires  to  his  en- 
trenchment. The  royalists  go  to  their  quarters,  but  with  hopes  of 
victory  over  the  traitor. — 2.  The  traitor  meditates  on  killing  the  sick 
and  those  soldiers  he  has  fears  of,  but  is  dissuaded  from  this. — 3.  He 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 


takes  their  arms  away  from  some  of  his  soldiers,  and  drives  away 
others,  telling  them  to  go  and  join  the  king’s  camp. — 4.  One  of 
Aguirre’s  soldiers  kills  Pedro  Bravo’s  horse.  The  traitor  determines 
to  return  to  the  coast  ......  220 


CHAPTER  LI. 

1.  The  maestro  del  campo  and  captain  Bravo  come  up  towards  Aguirre’s 
entrenchment.  Some  soldiers  go  out  to  oppose  them. — 2.  Captain 
Espindola,  with  a troop,  deserts  to  the  royalists,  and  all  the  rest  of 
Aguirre’s  soldiers  follow  their  example  by  various  routes. — 3.  The 
maestro  del  campo  sends  news  of  the  victory  to  the  governor.  Aguirre 
kills  his  daughter. — 4.  Aguirre  is  killed  by  two  arquebuses  fired  at 
him.  His  head  is  cut  off,  and  his  hands  are  given  to  those  from  Merida 
and  Valencia  .......  224 


CHAPTER  LII. 

1.  Gives  an  account  of  the  country  Aguirre  came  from,  his  character 
and  customs. — 2.  His  occupations  during  the  years  he  was  in  Peru. 
— 3.  An  account  of  the  depredations  he  committed. — 4.  Although  the 
governor  kept  his  promise  of  protection,  with  some  of  the  Marahones, 
yet  some  were  punished  ......  230 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  blood-stained  cruise  of  the  “ tyrant  Aguirre/5 
the  translated  narrative  of  which,  from  the  text  of 
the  old  chronicler  Simon,  is  now  printed  for  the 
first  time,  is  by  far  the  most  extraordinary  ad- 
venture in  search  of  El  Dorado  on  record.  The 
dauntless  hardihood  of  those  old  Spaniards  and  Ger- 
mans, who,  undismayed  by  the  reverses  and  sufferings 
of  numerous  predecessors,  continued  to  force  their  way 
for  hundreds  of  miles  into  the  forest  covered  wilds,  is 
sufficiently  astonishing;  but  in  this  cruise  of  Aguirre 
all  that  is  wildest,  most  romantic,  most  desperate, 
most  appalling  in  the  annals  of  Spanish  enterprise 
seems  to  culminate  in  one  wild  orgie  of  madness  and 
blood. 

The  history  of  previous  searches  after  the  fabled 
El  Dorado,  which  led  to  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and 
Aguirre,  truthful  and  authentic  as  it  is,  yet  seems 
fitter  for  the  pages  of  King  Arthur’s  romance  than 
for  a sober  narrative  of  facts.  It  is  necessary,  how- 
ever, that  these  romantic  expeditions  should  be  fresh 
in  the  reader’s  mind,  in  order  to  understand  the 
objects  and  views  of  the  men  who  followed  Aguirre 

b 


11 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  destruction,  and  the  exact  position  which  his 
expedition  occupies  in  the  history  of  South  American 
geographical  discovery. 

When  the  Spaniards  had  conquered  and  pillaged 
the  civilized  empires  on  the  table  lands  of  Mexico, 
Bogota,  and  Peru,  they  began  to  look  round  for  new 
scenes  of  conquest,  new  sources  of  wealth ; the 
wildest  rumours  were  received  as  facts,  and  the 
forests  and  savannas,  extending  for  thousands  of 
square  miles  to  the  eastward  of  the  cordilleras  of  the 
Andes,  were  covered,  in  imagination,  with  populous 
kingdoms,  and  cities  filled  with  gold.  The  story  of 
El  Dorado,  of  a priest  or  king  smeared  with  oil  and 
then  coated  with  gold  dust,  probably  originated  in  a 
custom  which  prevailed  amongst  the  civilized  Indians 
of  the  plateau  of  Bogota;1  but  El  Dorado  was  placed, 

1 “ When  the  chief  of  Guatavita  was  independent,  he  made  a 
solemn  sacrifice  every  year,  which,  for  its  singularity,  contributed 
to  give  celebrity  to  the  lake  of  Guatavita,  in  the  most  distant  coun- 
tries, and  which  was  the  origin  of  the  belief  in  El  Dorado,  in 
search  of  which  so  many  years  and  so  much  wealth  was  employed. 
On  the  day  appointed  the  chief  smeared  his  body  with  turpentine, 
and  then  rolled  in  gold  dust.  Thus  gilded  and  resplendent,  he 
entered  the  canoe,  surrounded  by  his  nobles,  whilst  an  immense 
multitude  of  people,  with  music  and  songs,  crowded  round  the 
shores  of  the  lake.  Having  reached  the  centre,  the  chief  deposited 
his  offerings  of  gold,  emeralds,  and  other  precious  things,  and  then 
jumped  in  himself,  to  bathe.  At  this  moment  the  surrounding 
hills  echoed  with  the  applause  of  the  people ; and,  when  the  reli- 
gious ceremony  concluded,  the  dancing,  singing,  and  drinking 
began.” — Descubrimiento  de  la  Nuevei  Granada , por  el  Coronel  J. 
Acosta,  p.  199. 

Here  we  have  the  origin  of  El  Dorado,  and  of  Raleigh’s  lake 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ill 


by  the  credulous  adventurers,  in  a golden  city  amidst 
the  impenetrable  forests  of  the  centre  of  South 
America,  and,  as  search  after  search  failed,  his 
position  was  moved  further  and  further  to  the  east- 
ward, in  the  direction  of  Guiana.  El  Dorado,  the 
phantom  god  of  gold  and  silver,  appeared  in  many 
forms.  The  Spaniards  of  Bogota  and  Venezuela 
explored  the  head  waters  of  the  Orinoco  and  the  Bio 
Negro  in  search  of  the  66  gilded  man,”  or  the  golden 
“ house  of  the  sun,”  and  no  fabulous  tale  was  too 
wild  for  their  credulity.  The  settlers  at  Quito  and 
in  Northern  Peru  talked  of  the  golden  empire  of  the 
Omaguas,  while  those  in  Cuzco  and  Charcas  dreamt 
of  the  wealthy  cities  of  Paytiti  and  Enim,  on  the 
banks  of  a lake  far  away  to  the  eastward  of  the 
Andes.  These  romantic  fables,  so  firmly  believed  in 
those  old  days,  led  to  the  exploration  of  vast  tracts  of 
country,  by  the  fearless  adventurers  of  the  sixteenth 

of  Parima,  and  golden  city  of  Manoa.  It  is  implied  that  the 
ceremony  did  not  take  place  subsequent  to  the  conquest  of  Gua- 
tavita  by  Nemequene,  the  Zipa  of  Bogota,  about  forty  years  before 
the  appearance  of  the  Spaniards  ; so  that,  on  their  arrival,  tradi- 
tions only  existed  of  the  gilded  chief  of  the  lake,  which,  in  a con- 
fused and  exaggerated  form,  seem  to  have  originated  the  belief 
in  El  Dorado,  and  in  a great  city  in  the  central  plains  of  South 
America. 

The  people  of  Guatavita  believed  that  their  deity  resided  in  the 
lake,  and  yearly  sacrifices  of  gold  and  emeralds  were  made  to  him. 
Cochrane  gives  an  amusing  account  of  an  attempt  to  drain  this  lake, 
which  is  only  a short  distance  from  Bogota ; and  several  gold 
ornaments  have  been  fished  up,  from  time  to  time,  but  it  is  be- 
lieved that  millions  still  remain  buried  in  the  slime,  at  the  bottom. 
— Cochrane's  Travels , ii,  p.  201. 


IV 


INTRODUCTION. 


century,  portions  of  which  have  never  been  traversed 
since,  even  to  this  day. 

The  most  famous  searches  after  El  Dorado  were 
undertaken  from  the  coast  of  Venezuela,  and  the 
most  daring  leaders  of  these  wild  adventures  were 
German  Knights.1 

Shortly  after  Ojeda  had  discovered  the  coast  of 
Venezuela,  and  Rodrigo  de  Bastidas  had  established 
a settlement  at  Santa  Martha,  the  emperor  Charles  V 
made  an  agreement  with  a company  of  Germans  to 
colonize  these  rich  provinces.  The  Velsers  of  Augs- 
burg were  great  merchants  who  traded  in  all  parts  of 
the  world,  and  they  agreed,  through  their  Agents, 
Enrique  de  Alfinger  and  Geronimo  Sailler,  to  found 
two  cities  and  three  forts  within  two  years,  to  arm 
four  ships,  and  take  out  three  hundred  Spaniards 
and  fifty  German  miners ; on  condition  that  the 
emperor  granted  them  the  country  extending  from 
Cabo  de  la  Vela  to  Maracapana  (except  the  portion 
previously  granted  to  one  Juan  de  Ampuez)  and 
without  limit  to  the  south,  gave  the  title  of  Adelan- 
tado  to  the  governor  appointed  by  them,  and  allowed 
them  to  make  slaves  of  the  Indians.2  At  about  the 
same  time  Bastidas,  the  governor  of  Santa  Martha, 
had  died,  and  it  was  arranged  that  Garcia  de  Lerma, 

1 The  early  expeditions  to  the  river  Orinoco,  of  Diego  de  Ordaz, 
and  Geronimo  de  Ortal,  the  lying  tale  of  Martinez  concerning  the 
city  of  Manoa,  the  advance  of  Sedeho  towards  the  Meta,  and  the 
remarkable  expedition  of  Berreo,  have  already  been  described  in 
Sir  Robert  Schomburgk’s  copious  notes  to  Raleigh’s  Guiana. 

2 Yet  two  friars  wer*  sent  out,  with  the  title  of  “ Protectors  of 
the  Indians.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


V 


a knight  of  Burgos,  the  new  governor,  should  go  out 
in  the  German  ships  to  Santa  Martha,  and  that  the 
Germans  should  then  proceed  to  their  destination. 
Ambrosio  de  Alfinger  was  named  governor,  and 
Bartolome  Sailler  Lieutenant  Governor,  by  the  Vel- 
sers,  both  Germans,  and  the  expedition  sailed  from 
Spain  in  1528. 

Having  landed  Lerma  at  Santa  Martha,  Ambrosio 
de  Alfinger,  with  four  hundred  men  and  fifty  horses, 
went  to  Coro,  on  the  coast  of  Venezuela,  which  had 
been  founded  in  1527  by  Juan  de  Ampuez,  who 
afterwards  retired  to  Curacoa.  The  coast  offered  few 
temptations  to  the  German  adventurer,  and  Alfinger, 
leaving  his  lieutenant  Sailler  in  command  at  Coro, 
determined  to  make  an  expedition  into  the  interior, 
in  1530,  in  search  of  some  fabulous  golden  city  in  the 
forests  far  to  the  south.  He  left  Coro  with  about 
two  hundred  Spaniards,  and  several  hundred  un- 
fortunate Indians,  laden  with  provisions  and  stores  ; 
and  the  cruelties,  committed  by  this  savage  on  the 
poor  defenceless  people,  were  reported  in  Europe,  and 
were  amongst  the  tales  which  made  the  blood  of 

Raleigh  and  Sir  Richard  Hawkins  boil  with  generous 

% 

indignation  at  the  very  name  of  a Spaniard.  To 
prevent  the  laden  Indians  from  deserting,  Alfin- 
ger’s  soldiers  fastened  them  to  a chain,  by  a ring 
round  their  necks ; thus,  to  let  one  out,  it  was 
necessary  to  loosen  the  whole  row ; but,  to  save 
time,  when  an  Indian  became  too  tired  to  go  on, 
they  cut  off*  his  head,  and  let  the  body  drop  out, 
saying  that,  as  it  was  necessary  to  leave  him  behind, 


VI 


INTRODUCTION. 


it  was  the  same  to  them  whether  he  was  alive  or 
dead,  and  the  trouble  of  loosening  the  chain  was 
saved. 

When  Alfinger  reached  the  lagoon  which  the  river 
Cesar  forms,  at  its  confluence  with  the  Magdalena, 
the  fame  of  his  cruelties  had  preceded  him,  and  all 
the  natives  had  taken  refuge  on  the  islands  in  the 
lake ; but  the  greedy  Spaniards,  seeing  the  glitter  of 
their  golden  ornaments  from  a distance,  spurred  their 
horses  into  the  lake,  and  swam  to  one  of  the  islands, 
where  the  Indians,  terrified  at  so  strange  a sight, 
were  all  killed  or  taken  prisoners.  The  Indian  chief 
of  the  district  of  Tamalameque  gave  himself  up,  and 
supplied  the  Spaniards  with  provisions  and  gold 
ornaments.  So  great  was  the  spoil,  that  Alfinger 
sent  twenty-five  of  his  men  back  to  Coro,  with  booty 
valued  at  60,000  dollars,  to  buy  horses  and  arms  ; 
and  waited  a whole  year  for  their  return,  at  the 
confluence  of  the  rivers  Cesar  and  Margarita.  He 
waited  in  vain,  and  at  length  the  ruthless  adventurers 
began  to  follow  the  stream  of  the  Magdalena,  living 
on  wild  fruits  and  insects,  and  suffering  from  fever, 
and  the  torments  of  mosquitos  Their  wretchedness 
soon  became  unbearable,  and  Alfinger  led  them  up 
the  mountains  to  the  eastward,  into  a cold  country, 
where  they  lived  on  land  shells,  and  where  three 
hundred  of  the  naked  Indians  and  many  Spaniards 
were  frozen  to  death  during  the  nights.  The  wan- 
derers then  descended  into  the  valley  of  Chinacota, 
where  they  were  exposed  to  constant  attacks  from 
the  wild  Indians,  and  finally  Alfinger  was  wounded 


INTRODUCTION. 


Vll 


in  the  neck,  and  died  in  three  days.  He  was  buried 
at  the  foot  of  a tree,  and  his  epitaph  was  cut  in  the 
bark,  by  his  surviving  comrades.1 

His  worn  out  followers  reached  the  valley  of 
Cucuta,  but,  rendered  fiercer  and  more  cruel  by  their 
sufferings,  they  slaughtered  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren in  the  villages  on  their  line  of  march ; and,  in 
1532,  worn  out  and  decimated  by  disease,  they  found 
their  way  back  to  Coro  ; and  thus  ended  the  first 
expedition  of  the  Germans  in  Venezuela,  and  the 
first  search  for  El  Dorado.2 

On  the  death  of  Alfinger,  a German  knight  named 
Nicholas  Fedreman  went  to  Castille,  to  apply  for  the 
government  of  Venezuela ; but  it  was  given  to 
another  knight  of  the  same  nation,  named  George  of 
Spires,  and  Fedreman  was  appointed  his  lieutenant- 
general.  They  raised  four  hundred  men  in  Anda- 
lusia and  Murcia,  and  reached  Coro  in  1534.  Since 
the  time  of  Alfinger,  the  rumours  concerning  great 
wealth  to  be  found  in  the  wilds,  to  the  eastward  of 
the  Andes,  had  increased  in  number ; and  George  of 
Spires  resolved  to  make  an  attempt  to  solve  the  mys- 
tery which  enveloped  those  unknown  regions.3  He 
left  Coro  with  three  hundred  infantry  and  one  hun- 
dred cavalry,  crossed  the  mountains  near  the  sources 
of  the  Tocuyo,  descended  to  the  plains,  and,  after 


1 Castellanos,  pt.  ii,  el.  i,  canto  4. 

2 Strictly  speaking,  Alfinger  did  not  search  for  El  Dorado,  as 
that  fable  was  not  yet  in  existence,  but  for  some  golden  country  of 
his  own  imagination. 

3 Herrera , Dec.  v,  Lib.  9,  cap.  v. 


Vlll 


INTRODUCTION. 


waiting  for  some  months  until  the  periodical  in- 
undations of  those  regions  had  subsided,  began  his 
march  to  the  south.  The  expedition  of  George  of 
Spires,  which  commenced  in  1536,  was  composed  of 
determined  men  ; and  they  penetrated  into  regions 
which  have  scarcely  ever  been  visited  since,  braving 
hardships  and  dangers  which  would  have  been  in- 
surmountable to  men,  who  were  not  actuated  by 
the  extraordinary  enthusiasm  of  these  early  con- 
querors. They  avoided  the  mountains,  on  account 
of  the  great  difficulty  of  making  roads  passable  for 
horses  ; but,  in  doing  this,  they  encountered  great 
risks  in  crossing  the  rivers,  and  suffered  from  want 
of  provisions,  the  swarms  of  mosquitos,  the  unhealthi- 
ness of  the  climate,  and  the  attacks  of  wild  Indians. 
During  the  dry  season  they  found  plenty  of  deer  on 
the  plains,  which  supplied  them  with  wholesome 
food,  but,  when  the  rains  came  on,  and  the  country 
was  inundated,  their  sole  food  consisted  of  palmitos 
and  wild  roots  : and  the  attempts  they  made  to  con- 
struct canoes,  and  go  afloat  in  them,  in  search  of 
provisions,  only  ended  in  disappointment.  It  is  also 
recorded,  that  the  jaguars  were  so  numerous  and 
ferocious,  that  they  carried  off  the  horses  in  broad 
daylight,  and  even  killed  a Spaniard,  and  several 
Indians. 

George  continued  to  advance  to  the  south,  through 
a country  inhabited  by  different  Indian  tribes,  and 
found  great  inconvenience  from  the  diversity  of  lan- 
guages, which  rendered  interpreters  useless.  They 
crossed  the  Ariari,  and  afterwards  the  Guaviare  river, 


INTRODUCTION, 


IX 


where  they  encountered  a tribe  of  Indians  called 
Guayupes,1  who  painted  their  bodies  black,  and  came 
to  battle  half  drunk,  so  that  it  was  not  difficult  to 
repulse  their  attacks.  The  extreme  point  reached 
by  the  knight  of  Spires  was  the  margin  of  the  river 
Papamene,2  whence  he  returned  to  Coro,  and  a glance 
at  the  map  will  show  the  immense  extent  of  country 
which  he  traversed,  in  this  daring  and  romantic  ex- 
pedition. During  the  retreat  to  Coro,  many  officers 
died,  and  among  them  Murcia  de  Fondon,  who  had 
acted  as  secretary  to  Francis  I,  during  his  captivity 
in  Madrid.  George  of  Spires  reached  Coro  in  May 
1538,  after  an  absence  of  three  years,  during  which 
time  he  marched  upwards  of  one  thousand  five  hun- 
dred miles  into  the  interior  of  South  America.  He 
was  a mild  good  man,  and  died  peacefully  as  gover- 
nor of  Venezuela,  in  1540.3 

In  the  meanwhile  his  lieutenant,  Nicholas  Fedre- 
man,  followed  his  chief,  with  reinforcements  and 
supplies,  until  he  found  himself  in  the  vicinity  of  his 
countryman’s  camp,  when  ambition  prompted  him  to 
avoid  a meeting,  and  to  continue  his  discoveries  on 

1 The  tJaupes  Indians,  on  the  head  waters  of  the  Rio  Negro,  of 
whom  a very  interesting  account  is  given  by  Wallace,  p.  482. 

2 The  same  as  the  river  Caqueta,  or  its  tributary  the  Rio  de  la 
Fragua,  according  to  Humboldt ; but  Colonel  Acosta,  in  his  map, 
makes  the  river  Papamene  one  of  the  tributaries  of  the  Guaviare. 

3 Benzoni,  however,  says  that  he  was  murdered  in  his  bed,  by 
the  Spaniards,  who  mangled  him,  by  dragging  his  body  igno- 
miniously  about,  and  finally  throwing  it  into  a wood.  He  adds 
that  the  murderers  were  severely  punished,  by  order  of  the  em- 
peror. ( Benzoni , in  Hakluyt  Coll.,  p.  76.) 

C 


X 


INTRODUCTION. 


his  own  account,  with  about  two  hundred  men. 
Fedreman  is  described  as  an  active  and  energetic 
German,  of  middle  size,  with  a flowing  red  beard ; 
he  was  beloved  by  his  soldiers,  and  no  cruelty  to  the 
Indians  is  recorded  of  him.  After  leaving  the 
track  of  his  chief,  Fedreman  came  to  the  banks  of  a 
river,  where  there  were  ruins  of  villages,  and  the 
Indians  told  him  that,  many  years  ago,  a serpent 
with  numerous  heads  had  come  out  of  the  river,  and 
devoured  all  the  inhabitants.  He  passed  the  rainy 
season  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains,  near  the  banks 
of  the  river  Casanare,  then  crossed  the  Meta,  and, 
after  wandering  about  for  three  years,  he  finally 
crossed  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  cordilleras  of 
Sumapaz,  and  met  the  famous  conquerors,  Quesada 
and  Belalcazar,  on  the  plains  of  Bogota,  in  April  1539. 

This  was,  in  many  respects,  a very  remarkable 
meeting.  The  great  conqueror  of  New  Granada, 
Don  Gonzalo  Ximenes  de  Quesada,  and  his  colleague, 
the  Adelantado  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Lugo,  in  ex- 
ploring the  course  of  the  river  Magdalena,  had  dis- 
covered the  country  of  the  civilized  Chibchas,  and 
reached  the  plateau  of  Bogota  in  1537.  The  history 
of  the  conquest  of  New  Granada,  which  is  equal  in 
interest  to  those  of  Mexico  or  Peru,  has  not  yet 
found  a Prescott ; although  the  Chibchas  were  more 
civilized  than  the  Aztecs,  prodigious  wealth  was 
derived  from  the  sack  of  their  cities,1  and  the  ad- 

1 At  Tunja  alone  the  Spaniards  found  191,294  dollars  worth  of 
fine  gold  ; 37,288  dollars  of  rough  gold  ; 18,390  dollars  of  silver  ; 
and  1815  emeralds. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XI 


ventures  of  the  Quesadas  were  as  romantic  as  those 
of  Cortes  or  Pizarro. 

Sebastian  de  Belalcazar  had  marched  north  from 
Quito,  conquered  Popayan  in  1535,  and  reached 
Bogota  in  1538  ; while  Fedreman,  after  wandering 
for  three  years  in  search  of  El  Dorado,  also  joined 
Quesada  and  Belalcazar,  on  the  heights  of  Bogota,  in 
1539.  After  a brief  sojourn,  the  three  discoverers 
proceeded  down  the  river  Magdalena  together  ; Lugo 
died  at  Santa  Martha,  while  Quesada  proceeded  to 
Spain,  to  obtain  the  government  of  his  new  dis- 
coveries, where  he  found  a formidable  rival  in  Luis, 
the  son  of  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Lugo. 

Hernan  Perez  de  Quesada,  the  brother  of  the 
great  discoverer,  was  left  in  command  at  Bogota,  and, 
excited  by  the  narrative  of  Fedreman’s  adventures, 
he  also  became  wild  for  the  discovery  of  El  Dorado. 
A party,  led  by  Montalvo  de  Lugo,  had  arrived  from 
Venezuela  in  the  footsteps  of  Fedreman,  and  Quesada 
joined  this  small  force  with  about  two  hundred  men 
and  some  horses,  and  set  out  in  search  of  “ the  house 
of  the  sun.”  Before  departing  from  Bogota,  how- 
ever, he  was  guilty  of  the  cowardly  and  unnecessary 
murder  of  the  young  Zaque  of  the  Chibchas,  in  order, 
as  he  said,  that  he  might  leave  the  affairs  of  Bogota 
in  a state  of  tranquillity  in  his  rear.1  Quesada 

1 This  Quesada  was  a brutal  adventurer.  He  not  only  mur- 
dered the  innocent  young  Quemichua,  Zaque  of  Bogota,  on  this 
occasion,  who  was  much  loved  by  the  Indians ; but  also  the  chiefs 
of  Samaca,  Turmeque,  Boyaca,  and  others,  as  he  said,  to  preserve 
tranquillity  in  his  rear.  It  was  believed  that  his  death  by  lightning 
some  years  afterwards,  was  a divine  visitation  for  this  cruelty. 


Xll 


INTRODUCTION. 


appears  to  have  marched  from  Tunja,  and  to  have 
descended  into  the  plains,  taking  the  same  route  as 
George  of  Spires,  until  he  reached  the  forests  of 
Mocoa.  His  people  endured  the  most  appalling 
hardships,  and,  having  eaten  all  the  horses,  they 
were  finally  reduced  to  feed  upon  an  unhappy  old 
donkey  belonging  to  Friar  Fequejada,  their  father 
confessor,  which,  as  the  chronicler  pathetically  relates, 
“ was  brought  from  the  hills  of  Santa  Martha,  to 
leave  its  bones  amongst  the  affluents  of  the  Ama- 
zons.” At  length  Quesada  gave  up  all  hopes  of 
finding  “ the  house  of  the  sun,”  and,  having  lost  one 
half  of  his  men,  he  returned  to  Bogota,  after  an 
absence  of  one  year.1  He  was  the  first  to  enter  the 
land  of  the  Musos  Indians. 

While  Quesada  was  penetrating  into  the  central 
plains,  from  the  side  of  Bogota,  a large  and  important 
expedition  in  search  of  El  Dorado  was  organized  in 
Venezuela.  Soon  after  the  death  of  George  of  Spires 
in  1540,  the  Bishop,  Don  Bodrigo  Bastidas,2  became 
governor  of  Venezuela,  and  appointed  a German 
knight  named  Philip  von  Huten  to  be  his  Lieutenant 
General. 

Huten3  was  a relation  of  the  Velsers,  and  had  been 

1 Some  chroniclers  state  that  Quesada  descended  a second  time 
into  the  plains,  in  search  of  El  Dorado.  He  governed  Bogota  for 
his  brother,  for  two  years ; and  was  killed  by  lightning,  in  a ship, 
when  on  his  way  to  join  the  judge  Armendariz  at  Carthagena,inl545. 

2 Piedrahita , pt.  i,  lib.  x,  cap.  i.  Bastidas,  formerly  dean  of 
St.  Domingo,  was  appointed  first  bishop  of  Coro  in  1531,  and 
governor  of  Venezuela  in  1541. 

3 He  is  called  Felipe  de  Utre,  or  de  Urre,  by  the  Spaniards. 


INTRODUCTION. 


Xlll 


one  of  the  companions  of  George  of  Spires  in  his 
famous  expedition.  He  was  prudent  and  brave,  and 
no  captain  in  the  Indies  is  said  to  have  been  more 
humane.  In  July  1541  this  officer  organized  a great 
expedition  to  search  for  El  Dorado,  in  the  hope  of 
meeting  with  more  success  than  had  fallen  to  the  lot  of 
his  old  commander,  George  of  Spires.  Many  gallant 
young  cavaliers  flocked  to  his  standard ; Pedro  de 
Limpias  was  his  maestro  del  campo ; Bartolome 
Yelser,  a youth  of  great  promise,  Sebastian  de 
Amengua,  and  Pedro  de  Artiaga  were  his  captains. 
The  expedition  left  Coro  by  sea,  landed  at  Burburata, 
marched  thence  to  Barquisimeto,  and,  advancing  into 
the  central  plains,  wintered  at  a village  called  by 
George  of  Spires,  of  our  Lady,  and  by  Fedreman, 
La  Fragua,  where  he  received  tidings  that  Quesada, 
with  200  men,  had  passed,  a short  time  before  him. 
After  the  winter,  Huten  reached  the  province  of 
Papamene,1  near  the  skirts  of  the  cordilleras  of 
Timana,  where  an  Indian  advised  him  not  to  follow 
Quesada,  as  he  must  have  entered  an  uninhabited 
region,  and  suffered  severely.  The  Indian  offered  to 
conduct  Huten  to  a land  rich  in  gold  and  silver, 
to  a city  called  Macatoa,  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Guaviare ; and  he  showed  him  some  apples  made  of 
gold  and  silver,  which  he  said  his  brother  had  brought 
from  that  city.  But  the  tales  of  this  Indian  were 
not  sufficient  to  induce  the  German  knight  to 
desist  from  following  on  the  track  of  Quesada, 

1 In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  head  waters  of  the  river  Caqueta 
or  Japura. 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


and,  after  marching  for  eight  days,  the  Indian  guide 
escaped. 

Sickness  and  famine  now  began  to  press  hard  upon 
the  intrepid  explorers.  Their  hunger  was  appeased 
by  placing  the  heads  of  maize  corn  at  the  mouths  of 
ant’s  nests,  which  were  soon  covered  with  ants,  and 
this,  for  many  days,  was  their  only  food.  Some  of 
them  found  a wild  fruit,  which  proved  to  be  unfit  for 
food ; for,  on  eating  it,  their  hair,  beards,  and  eye- 
brows fell  off,  and  the  horses  lost  their  hair,  and  died. 
After  wandering  for  a year,  in  this  forlorn  state,  they 
found  they  had  been  moving  in  a circle,  and  came 
to  the  spot  from  whence  they  had  set  out  full  of 
hope,  twelve  months  before. 

The  determination  of  the  intrepid  German,  to  con- 
tinue the  search  for  El  Dorado,  was  undiminished  by 
this  failure ; he  had  heard  of  a city  called  Macatoa 
from  the  Indian  ; and  he  once  more  started  with 
Pedro  de  Limpias,  who  was  known  to  be  brave  and 
quick  in  learning  languages,  and  forty  men.  After 
a long  march  they  reached  the  banks  of  the  river 
Guaviare,  where  Huten  met  with  an  Indian,  whom 
he  sent  as  an  envoy  to  Macatoa,  which  he  had  heard 
was  at  no  great  distance.  In  a few  days  five  canoes 
arrived,  with  the  chief’s  son,  who  ferried  them  across 
the  river,  and  supplied  them  with  venison,  fish,  maize, 
and  cassava.  The  explorers  were  then  conducted  to 
the  city,  which  they  found  to  consist  of  well-con- 
structed houses  (or  huts  1),  built  in  streets,  with  open 
spaces  at  intervals,  containing  about  eight  hundred 
inhabitants  of  the  Guaypis,  Guayupes,  or  Uaupes 


INTRODUCTION. 


XV 


tribe  of  Indians.  Their  chief  was  a man  about  forty 
years  of  age,  of  middling  stature,  well  built,  with  an 
aquiline  nose,  and  fine  countenance. 

The  chief  of  the  Uaupes  advised  Huten  not  to  ad- 
vance against  the  Omaguas,  a rich  and  powerful 
tribe  to  the  southward,  with  so  small  a force ; but 
he  added  that  they  possessed  much  gold  and  silver, 
which  was  a sufficient  inducement  to  the  explorers 
to  brave  all  dangers ; and  Huten  continued  his 
march,  with  guides  and  provisions.  This  dauntless 
commander  had  now  entered  the  country  which 
Mr.  Wallace,  as  late  as  1853,  calls  “ the  unknown 
regions  between  the  Rio  Guaviare  on  the  one  side, 
and  the  Japura,  on  the  other.”1  After  marching  for 
five  days  the  explorers  came  to  a village  of  fifty  huts, 
inhabited  by  Indians  appointed  to  guard  the  crops  of 
the  Omaguas.  Huten  and  his  companions,  from  this 
place,  saw  a town  of  such  size  that,  although  one 
part  of  it  was  very  close,  they  could  not  see  the  other 
end  of  it ; the  streets  were  straight,  with  the  houses 
touching  each  other ; and  there  was  an  edifice  of 
great  height  in  the  centre  of  the  town,  which,  ac- 
cording to  the  Indian  guides,  was  inhabited  by 
Quarica,  the  lord  of  the  Omaguas,  and  served  also  as 
a temple  for  many  idols  of  gold.  The  guides  added 
that  further  on  there  were  other  cities,  larger  and 
richer  than  this. 

Stimulated  by  the  stories  of  the  Indians,  Philip 
von  Huten  charged  down  the  hill,  towards  the  city, 
with  his  intrepid  little  band  ; but  the  Omaguas  came 
1 Wallace,  p.  502. 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


out  of  the  city  in  great  force,  to  the  sound  of  drums; 
and  Iluten,  having  been  severely  wounded,  was 
obliged  to  retreat,  and  was  carried  off  the  field  in  a 
hammock,  by  his  friendly  Indian  guides.  The  re- 
treating Spaniards  were  followed  by  a large  army  of 
Omaguas,  who  harrassed  their  rear  until  they  were 
finally  repulsed  by  Pedro  de  Limpias,  but  this  stub- 
born resistance  of  the  Omaguas  put  an  end  to  the 
search  for  El  Dorado.  The  friendly  chief  of  the 
Uaupes  resorted  to  a strange  method  of  discovering 
the  means  of  curing  Huten’s  wound.  An  old  slave 
was  dressed  in  the  German  knight’s  armour,  and 
placed  upon  his  horse,  and,  while  in  this  position,  an 
Indian  wounded  him  in  the  same  way  that  the 
Omagua  had  wounded  Huten.  Thus,  by  cutting 
the  old  slave  up,  they  discovered  the  direction  of 
Huten’s  wound,  and  cured  him. 

The  explorers  now  recrossed  the  Guaviare,  and 
determined  to  return  to  Coro,  where  a melancholy  fate 
awaited  their  gallant  leader.  During  the  expedition 
a jealousy  had  arisen  between  Pedro  de  Limpias, 
the  maestro  del  campo,  and  Bartolome  Velser,  the 
lieutenant-general ; which  ended  in  the  former  de- 
serting Huten,  and  returning  to  Coro  before  him. 

The  land  discovered  by  Philip  von  Huten,  between 
the  Guaviare  and  the  Caqueta,  may  not  improbably 
have  been  inhabited,  in  those  days,  by  a very  popu- 
lous nation,  for  there  is  other  evidence  to  show  that 
the  Omaguas,  though  now  dwindled  to  a small  tribe 
on  the  banks  of  the  Amazons,  may  have  been  both 
powerful  and  numerous  in  the  days  of  Huten,  three 


INTRODUCTION. 


XVU 


centuries  ago,  The  great  city  reported  by  Huten 
may  be  taken  to  mean  a populous  region  studded 
with  villages,  and  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the 
rest  of  the  account  of  this  remarkable  expedition. 
Humboldt  thinks  it  likely  that  the  streamlets  which 
form  the  rivers  Uaupes  and  Caqueta,  flowing  through 
the  region  in  which  Huten  sought  for  El  Dorado, 
and  where  he  fought  the  battle  of  Omaguas  with  a 
handful  of  men,  may  be  auriferous  ; and  he  mentions 
that  though  the  Indian  tribes  of  this  region  have  no 
name  for  silver,  they  all  have  one  for  gold.  Be  this 
as  it  may,  the  expedition  of  Philip  von  Huten  created 
a great  sensation  throughout  the  New  World;  from 
that  time  the  name  of  the  Omaguas  was  coupled  with 
that  of  El  Dorado,  as  the  emblem  of  inexhaustible 
wealth ; and  from  the  days  of  Huten  to  those  of 
Humboldt  only  one  European1  explored  the  region 
between  the  Guaviare  and  the  Caqueta.2 

During  the  absence  of  the  expedition  in  search  of 
El  Dorado,  the  government  of  Venezuela  had 
been  seized  by  one  Carbajal,  a brutal  soldier,  who 


1 Fray  Francisco  Pugnet,  Humboldt’s  informant,  the  guardian 
of  the  convent  of  St.  Francis,  at  Popayan. 

2 The  expeditions  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  to  Canela,  and  of  Orellana 
down  the  river  Amazon,  took  place  just  before  that  of  Philip  von 
Huten.  Orellana  sailed  down  the  Amazon,  and  heard  of  the 
Omaguas,  in  1540;  and  Huten  started  from  Coro  in  July  1541, 
the  month  previous  to  Orellana’s  arrival  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ama- 
zon. Humboldt  remarks  that  “ the  descendants  of  those  intrepid 
warriors  who  had  pushed  their  conquests  from  Peru  to  the  coast  of 
New  Granada,  and  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon,  were  ignorant  of  the 
roads  which  lead  from  Coro  to  the  river  Meta.” 


d 


XV111 


INTRODUCTION. 


arrested  Huten  and  Velser  on  their  return  to  Coro, 
caused  their  hands  to  be  tied,  and  their  heads  to  be 
cut,  or  rather  sawn  off  with  a blunt  macheta , which  had 
been  used  for  chopping  wood.  With  the  sad  deaths  of 
these  two  chivalrous  knights,  ended  the  rule  of  those 
Germans  in  Venezuela,  who  added  so  romantic  a page 
to  the  history  of  South  American  discovery.1  Carbajal 
continued  to  commit  many  excesses  ; and  in  1545  he 
founded  the  city  of  Tocuyo,  in  a beautiful  valley, 
producing  wheat,  cotton,  and  sugar-cane.  In  the 
same  year  the  Licentiate  Juan  Perez  de  Tolosa  of 
Segovia,  a learned  and  prudent  man,  was  sent  out  by 
the  emperor  to  settle  the  affairs  of  Venezuela,  and  in 
1546  he  tried  and  executed  Carbajal.2  The  Ger- 
mans were  deprived  of  the  government,  owing  to  the 
numerous  complaints  of  tyranny  and  disorder  that 
were  made  against  them,  insomuch  that  the  good 
Las  Casas  called  the  province  “ infeliz  y desgra- 
ciada.” 

For  several  years  the  Spaniards  occupied  them- 
selves more  in  settling  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  the  coast,  than  in  exploring  expeditions. 
Tolosa’s  brother  crossed  the  Apure,  and  reached 
the  valley  of  Cucuta ; in  1547  Juan  de  Villegas 
discovered  the  lake  of  Tacarigua ; in  1549  Pedro 
Alvarez  founded  Burburata ; and  in  1552  Ville- 
gas founded  Barquisimeto.  Thus  the  province  of 

1 My  accounts  of  the  expeditions  of  Alfinger,  George  of  Spires, 
Fedreman,  Quesada,  and  Huten,  are  taken  from  Castellanos, 
Simon,  Piedrahita,  Herrera,  and  Oviedo  y Banos. 

2 Oviedo  y Banos , i,  lib.  iii,  cap.  iii. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XIX 


Venezuela  was  gradually  colonized,  and  it  will 
only  be  necessary  to  mention  one  other  settler, 
because  he  appears  on  the  scene  in  the  narrative  of 
Aguirre’s  cruise.1  This  was  Francisco  de  Taxardo, 
the  son  of  a Spaniard  of  the  island  of  Margarita,  by 
an  Indian  princess  of  the  Guaigueri  nation.  He 
determined  to  form  a settlement  in  the  country  of 
Caraccas,  and,  sailing  from  Margarita  in  April  1555, 
in  two  piraguas  with  twenty  Indians  of  his  mother’s 
tribe,  was  well  received  by  the  natives  of  Caraccas, 
and  was  established  there  when  Aguirre  reached 
Margarita  in  156L 

While  the  Germans  were  searching  for  El  Dorado 
from  the  side  of  Venezuela,  the  course  of  events  in 
New  Granada  brings  Pedro  de  Ursua  on  the  scene ; 
the  principal  person  in  the  narrative  which  forms  the 
subject  of  the  present  volume. 

We  have  seen  that  Gonzalo  Ximenes  de  Quesada, 
the  great  conqueror  of  Bogota,  had  sailed  for  Spain 
to  obtain  the  government  of  his  new  discoveries.  In 
this  Quesada  failed,  and  Don  Luis  Alonzo  de  Lugo, 
the  son  of  his  former  comrade,  was  appointed 
Adelantado  of  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada;  but  his 
reign  was  very  brief.  He  reached  the  coast  in  1542, 
and  in  1545  the  Judge  Don  Miguel  Diaz  de  Armen- 
dariz  was  sent  out  by  the  Council  of  the  Indies,  to 
examine  into  his  conduct,  and  to  take  what  was  called 
a residencia  of  Carthagena,  Santa  Martha,  and 
Popayan,  with  full  powers.  Immediately  on  landing 
at  Carthagena,  Armendariz  received  numerous  com- 
1 See  page  164-5  of  this  volume. 


XX 


INTRODUCTION. 


plaints  of  the  tyranny  of  Lugo,  from  persons  who  had 
been  banished  from  Bogota ; and  he  appointed  his 
young  nephew,  Don  Pedro  de  Ursua,  to  proceed  to 
that  city  and  take  charge  of  the  government,  whilst 
he  completed  his  examination  into  the  state  of  affairs 
on  the  coast.  Ursua  was  accompanied  by  Gonzalo 
Suarez  Rondon,  the  founder  of  Ronda,  and  other 
exiles,  who  had  been  banished  by  Lugo,  and  they 
proceeded  up  the  Magdalena  in  light  canoes.  Ursua 
was  received  at  Tunja  as  Governor,  but,  during  the 
night,  the  house  in  which  he  was  lodged  wTas  burnt  to 
the  ground,  and  this  served  as  a pretext  for  arresting 
Lugo,  and  confining  him  in  prison.  Ursua  then  con- 
tinued his  journey  to  Bogota,  where  he  administered 
the  government  until  the  arrival  of  his  uncle  Armen- 
dariz,  whose  first  act  was  to  torture  a citizen,  to  force 
him  to  disclose  the  persons  who  had  set  fire  to  Ursua’s 
house  at  Tunja. 

Pedro  de  Ursua  was  a knight  of  Navarre,  and  it 
was  considered,  at  the  time,  that  he  was  too  young 
and  inexperienced  for  the  important  post  entrusted  to 
him  by  his  uncle ; yet  he  proved  himself,  during  the 
short  period  of  his  rule,  to  be  equal  to  the  best  ad- 
ministrators that  had  ever  served  in  the  Indies.  He 
is  said  to  have  been  a youth,  who  united  a good 
education  and  great  sweetness  and  amiability  of 
temper,  to  uncommon  bravery  and  dexterity  in  mar- 
tial exercises.  Garcilasso  Inca  de  la  Vega,  who 
knew  him  in  Peru,  says  that  he  was  a generous  and 
honourable  man,  a perfect  gentleman,  and  generally 
liked  ; so  that,  when  he  was  collecting  supplies  for 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXI 


his  expedition,  people  readily  gave  him  all  he  wanted, 
because  he  was  an  universal  favourite.1  It  was 
natural  that  a young  knight  of  such  a disposition,  on 
hearing  the  accounts  of  the  expeditions  of  Alfinger, 
George  of  Spires,  Fedreman,  Quesada,  and  Philip  von 
Huten,  in  search  of  El  Dorado  and  the  Omaguas, 
should  be  inspired  with  a longing  to  emulate  their 
chivalrous  deeds,  and  to  make  a name  for  himself 
also,  as  an  intrepid  explorer  of  unknown  regions. 
Accordingly,  Armendariz,  at  his  own  urgent  request, 
appointed  him  to  the  command  of  an  expedition  to 
search  for  the  snowy  mountains  which  George  of 
Spires  and  Fedreman  were  reported  to  have  seen 
from  a distance,  and  for  the  rivers  which  flowed  over 
sands  of  gold. 

Ursua,  and  his  friend  Ortun  de  Velasco,  assembled 
a force  of  400  men,  who  expressed  their  desire  to 
serve  under  so  noble  a youth,  and  in  1548  they  left 
Tunja  and  directed  their  course  to  the  north-eastward. 
The  expedition  crossed  the  river  Sogamoso,  and 
entered  the  land  of  the  Laches  Indians,  whence  they 
advanced  to  the  country  of  the  Chitareros,  where 
Ursua  founded  a city,  which  he  named  after  his 
native  town  in  Navarre.  This  new  Pampluna  was 
laid  out  on  a regular  plan,  with  one  hundred  and 
thirty-six  lots  for  houses,  and  in  April  1549  the 
officers  of  the  new  city  were  nominated.  It  is  70 
leagues  N.E.  of  Bogota,  in  the  eastern  cordillera,  the 
climate  is  cold,  but  suitable  for  the  cultivation  of 
corn,  and  at  that  time  the  immediate  neighbourhood 
1 II,  lib.  viii,  cap.  14. 


XXII 


INTRODUCTION. 


was  inhabited  by  200,000  Chitareros  Indians.  Ursua 
remained  here  until  1550,  when  he  resigned  the 
command  to  Ortun  de  Velasco,  who  governed  the 
new  city1  for  twenty  years,  and  had  the  satisfaction 
of  drawing  and  quartering  the  murderer  of  his  old 
comrade’s  lady  love,  after  the  defeat  and  death  of  the 
monster  Aguirre  in  1561. 2 

While  Ursua  was  absent  on  his  Pampluna  expedi- 
tion, his  uncle,  Armendariz,  commenced  the  promul- 
gation of  the  new  laws,  which  caused  such  excite- 
ment in  the  New  World,  and  which,  in  Peru,  led  to 
the  death  of  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  de  Vela,  and 
the  rebellion  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro.  Armendariz  sent 
copies  of  these  new  laws  to  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar, 
with  orders  to  publish  them  at  Popayan,  but  they 
were  as  ill  received  by  the  colonists  of  Cauca  as  they 
had  been  in  Peru.  Belalcazar,  however,  was  a wiser 
man  than  the  rash  Gonzalo  Pizarro;  he  represented 
to  the  people  the  fatal  consequences  of  disobeying 
their  sovereign,  and  advised  them  to  send  a deputa- 
tion, to  pray  for  the  repeal  of  the  obnoxious  ordi- 
nances.3 At  the  same  time  the  astute  Belalcazar 
evaded  the  orders  he  had  received,  by  promulgating 
the  new  laws,  and  on  the  same  day  suspending  them 

1 The  province  of  Pampluna  extended  from  the  river  Zulia  to 
the  lake  of  Maracaibo ; and  by  this  route  came  the  merchandize 
of  Castille,  until  the  rising  of  the  Quiriquies  Indians  took  place, 
who  were  many  years  masters  of  the  banks  of  the  Maracaibo  Lake, 
and  destroyed  its  navigation. 

2 See  p.  237  (note)  of  this  volume. 

3 For  an  account  of  these  new  laws,  see  Prescott’s  Conquest  of 
Peru , ii,  p.  231,  and  Helps’  Spanish  Conquest  of  America , iv,  p.  153. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XX111 


until  further  directions  were  received  from  Spain  ; 
and  it  was  at  this  time  that  the  derisive  saying  origi- 
nated, which  afterwards  became  so  common  in 
Spanish  America,  “ Se  obedece  pero  no  se  cumple .”1 

In  1549,  and  in  the  midst  of  these  difficulties, 
Armendariz  was  superseded  by  a Royal  Audience, 
consisting  of  lawyers,  named  Mercado  (who  died  at 
Mompox  on  his  way),  Gongora,  and  Galarza.  Ar- 
mendariz resigned  his  office  to  the  two  latter,  who 
were  young  and  ignorant,  but  conciliatory  and 
upright,  and  inclined  to  exercise  the  office  of  peace- 
makers ; so  that  when,  shortly  afterwards,  the  lawyer 
Zurite  arrived  to  take  a residencia  of  Armendariz, 
against  whom  complaints  were  not  wanting,  not  of 
avarice  and  peculation,  however,  the  almost  invaria- 
ble cry  against  functionaries  in  the  Indies,  but  of 
sensuality,  he  was  let  off  very  easily.  The  com- 
plainers  then  wrote  to  the  Council  of  the  Indies,  who, 
very  unfairly  sent  out  a severe  man,  named  Montano, 
to  take  another  residencia , and  Armendariz  was  this 
time  sent  to  Spain,  and  so  heavily  fined,  that  the 
alguazils  took  the  cloak  from  his  back,  to  pay  their 
fees.  On  his  arrival  in  Spain,  Armendariz  became  a 

1 While  I was  at  Puno,  in  Southern  Peru,  last  year,  I was  told 
an  anecdote  of  a Spanish  intendente,  who  imitated  the  conduct  of 
Belalcazar.  Gonzalez  Montoya,  the  intendente  in  question,  a 
benevolent,  as  well  as  a determined  man,  governed  Puno  towards 
the  end  of  the  last  century.  He  abolished  the  mitas  of  Indians  in 
his  district,  for  the  mines  of  Potosi,  which  he  declared  to  be  a 
system  of  butchery ; and,  when  ordered  by  the  Spanish  government 
to  re-establish  them,  he,  like  Belalcazar,  exclaimed  “ Obeclesco 
pero  no  cumplo .” 


XXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


presbyter,  and  the  third  governor  of  New  Granada 
died  a canon  in  Siguenza.  His  persecutor  Montano 
was,  not  long  afterwards,  beheaded  for  rebellion  and 
cruelty. 

The  downfall  of  Armendariz  does  not  appear  to 
have  immediately  affected  the  fortunes  of  his  nephew  ; 
for  in  1549  the  auditors  appointed  Ursua  to  conduct 
an  expedition  against  the  Musos  Indians,  who  had 
recently  defeated  a Captain  Valdez,  and  to  search 
for  El  Dorado.  Ursua’s  party  consisted  of  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  men,  and  it  is  related  that  they  had 
plenty  of  powder,  but  so  little  lead  that  they  melted 
half  the  utensils  in  the  colony  to  make  bullets. 
They  entered  the  territory  of  the  Musos,  and  en- 
trenched themselves  in  a strong  position,  but  met 
with  much  resistance  from  the  natives.  At  length 
Ursua  made  a truce  with  them,  and  a sort  of  fair  was 
held  near  his  camp;  when  he  invited  the  chiefs  to 
come  in,  and  treacherously  murdered  them,  “ a felo- 
nious act,”  says  the  chronicler,  tc  and  unworthy  of 
a soldier  of  honour,  like  Ursua.”  The  Navarrese 
knight  then  founded  a city  named  Tudela,  and  re- 
turned to  Bogota  for  reinforcements,  which  he  con- 
ducted to  his  new  settlement  by  another  road.  In 
1552,  however,  the  Spaniards  were  so  constantly 
attacked  by  the  brave  Musos,  that  they  retired  from 
their  new  city  of  Tudela,  and  their  enemies  burnt  it 
before  their  eyes. 

No  Spaniard  entered  the  country  of  the  Musos  for 
some  years  after  this  repulse ; and  this  gallant  tribe 
of  Indians  strove  for  their  independence,  with  a con- 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXY 


stancy  and  valour  worthy  of  better  success,  for,  in 
the  end,  they  were  subjugated.  They  recognized  no 
chief,  but  followed  the  bravest  in  war,  and  the  oldest 
in  council ; and  their  chief  places  of  worship  were 
two  high  rocks,  near  the  river  Zarbi,  where  they 
offered  maize,  potatos,  and  yucas.1 

After  his  return  from  the  country  of  the  Musos, 
in  1551,  Pedro  de  Ursua  was  appointed  justicia 
mayor  of  Santa  Martha ; and  he  immediately  began 
to  prepare  for  the  conquest  of  the  Tayronas,  one  of 
the  most  warlike  of  the  Indian  tribes,  who  dwelt  in  the 
mountains  overhanging  the  town  and  valley.  Their 
country  was  rich  in  gold  and  silver,  and  they  made 
gold  ornaments,  in  the  shape  of  snakes,  toads,  eagles, 
deer,  crescents,  and  bats ; many  of  which  are  often 
dug  up  at  the  present  day,  closely  resembling  those 
which  have  been  lately  discovered  at  Chiriqui,  on  the 
isthmus  of  Panama.  In  1552  Ursua,  having  col- 
lected the  necessary  arms  and  supplies,  marched  out 
of  Santa  Martha,  and  penetrated  far  into  the  moun- 
tains ; but  the  Tayrona  Indians  retreated  before  him, 
harassing  his  outposts,  and  cutting  off  his  supplies, 
until  he  was  reduced  to  great  straits.  At  length 
Ursua  was  attacked  by  fever,  and  commenced  a re- 
treat, when  the  whole  tribe  of  Indians  occupied  a 
dangerous  part  of  the  road,  with  a precipice  on  one 
side,  and  a wall  of  rock  on  the  other,  called  the 

1 Herrera  gives  a full  account  of  the  formidable  Musos  Indians. 
—Dec.  v,  lib.  iv,  cap.  3.  Their  territory  bordered  on  the  provinces 
of  Bogota  (whence  it  was  twenty-four  leagues  distant,  to  the  west- 
ward), Velez,  and  Tunja. 

e 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


Pasos  de  Rodrigo,  with  the  intention  of  disputing  the 
passage  of  the  invaders.  The  Spaniards  encamped 
near  this  narrow  pass,  and  were  roused,  towards 
morning,  by  the  shouts  of  the  Indians,  and  by  the 
blows  of  their  war  clubs.  Ursua  was  in  his  tent  with 
the  fever  upon  him,  but  he  rushed  out,  well  armed, 
but  only  half  dressed,  and  with  but  one  shoe  on  ; 
and  found  his  little  army  surrounded  by  the  enemy. 
With  twelve  men  he  led  the  way  up  the  craggy 
rocks,  to  gain  the  head  of  the  pass,  stones  were 
hurled  down  upon  him  from  the  summit,  but  he 
reached  the  important  post,  fought  like  a lion  for  three 
hours,  and  at  length  the  Tayronas  wavered,  and, 
seizing  the  critical  moment,  the  Spaniards  charged 
and  scattered  them.1 

Ursua  then  returned  to  Santa  Martha,  but,  being 
evidently  of  a very  restless  disposition,  and  disgusted 
with  the  insufficient  means  at  his  command  for  con- 
quering the  Tayronas,  he  threw  up  his  appointment, 
and  sailed  for  Nombre  de  Dios,  with  the  intention  of 
going  to  Peru.  At  Panama  he  met  with  the  Mar- 
quis of  Canete,  the  new  viceroy  of  Peru,  then  on  his 
way  to  Lima,  who  had  already  heard  of  his  adven- 
turous career  in  New  Granada.  At  that  time  the 
isthmus  of  Panama  was  infested  by  large  numbers  of 
runaway  negro  slaves,  called  Cimarrones,  who  fre- 
quented the  road  from  Nombre  de  Dios  to  Panama, 
robbing  and  murdering  all  who  fell  into  their  hands. 
The  Marquis  of  Canete  recommended  the  Cabildo  of 
Panama  to  secure  the  services  of  Pedro  de  Ursua, 

1 Piedrahita,  Pte.  i,  lib.  xi,  cap.  ix,  p.  492. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXV11 


to  command  a force  for  the  extirpation  of  these 
marauders  ; and  that  captain  soon  afterwards  entered 
the  tangled  forests,  with  a body  of  two  hundred 
Spaniards.  The  negro  chief,  named  Bayano,  endea- 
voured to  tire  out  his  pursuers  by  long  counter- 
marches, and  sudden  night  attacks ; the  encounters 
were  numerous,  most  of  them  hand  to  hand  between 
the  swords  of  the  Spaniards  and  the  machetas  or  wood 
knives  of  the  negros ; but,  in  the  course  of  two 
years,  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Cimarrones  were 
killed,  and  the  remainder  surrendered,  and  returned 
to  their  masters.1  After  this  very  toilsome,  but  com- 
pletely successful  campaign,  Ursua  departed  from 
Panama,  and  sailed  for  Peru,  in  search  of  employ- 
ment and  distinction  ; and  it  was  at  Lima,  in  1559, 
that  he  received,  from  the  viceroy  Marquis  of 
Canete,  the  command  of  the  expedition  in  search  of 
El  Dorado,  and  the  Omaguas,  the  extraordinary  nar- 
rative of  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  present 
volume. 

The  marquis  of  Canete,  who  was  viceroy  of  Peru 
from  1555  to  1561,  arrived  shortly  after  the  sup- 
pression of  a revolt  headed  by  Francisco  Hernandez 
Giron,2  and  found  the  country  in  great  disorder, 

1 Piedrahita,  Pte.  i,  lib.  xii,  cap.  iv,  p.  528-30. 

2 For  a brief  account  of  Giron’s  insurrection,  see  Helps'  Spanish 
Conquest  of  America,  vol.  iv,  p.  290-96.  See  also  note  at  p.  232  of 
this  volume.  It  was  reported,  while  Giron  was  at  Nasca,  in  the 
course  of  his  rebellion,  that  Ursua  had  arrived  at  Piura,  and  de- 
clared for  Giron.  This  shows  that  Ursua  was  a captain  of  some 
renown,  and  that  his  name  was  known  throughout  South  Ame- 
rica.— G.  de  la  Vega.  Com.  Real.,  ii,  p.  429. 


XXV111 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  infested  by  disbanded  soldiers,  and  lawless  cha- 
racters of  every  description.  He  commenced  his 
administration  by  several  acts  of  great  severity,  of 
which  the  traitor  Aguirre  complained  bitterly  in  his 
letter  to  king  Philip  and  the  expedition  of  Ursua 
exactly  suited  his  policy,  because  it  enabled  him  to 
get  rid  of  a great  number  of  lawless  ruffians  from  all 
parts  of  Peru,  who,  now  that  the  civil  wars  were  at 
an  end,  were  prowling  over  the  country  without 
employment.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the 
viceroy,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  his  countrymen, 
also  believed  firmly  in  the  tales  concerning  El  Dorado 
and  the  Omaguas,  which  were  brought  directly  to  his 
notice  in  the  following  way. 

It  appears  that  on  the  coast  of  Brazil  there  was  a 
valorous  Indian  chief,  named  Viraratu,  probably  of 
the  nation  of  Tupinambas,  who  assembled  a large 
body  of  warlike  men  in  a fleet  of  canoes,  with  arms 
and  food,  intending  to  enter  the  river  Maraiion,  and 
conquer  other  lands.  He  was  accompanied  by  two 
Portuguese,  who  knew  his  language.  After  ascending 
the  river  Maraiion  for  some  days,  they  came  to  a 
great  lake,  in  a vast  plain  surrounded  by  lofty  moun- 
tains, with  so  many  and  such  large  villages  on  its 
shores,  that  the  Brazilians  were  astonished.  The 
natives  collected  a great  fleet  of  canoes,  and  a naval 
battle  followed,  in  which  the  invaders  were  defeated. 
Viraratu,  therefore,  returned  to  the  river,  but  the 
people  of  the  lake  followed  him,  and  shot  arrows 
from  both  sides.  The  Brazilians  continued  to  ascend 


1 See  p.  188  of  this  volume. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXIX 


the  great  river  steadily,  until  they  at  length  reached 
Moyobamba,  near  the  river  Huallaga  in  Peru,  a dis- 
trict inhabited  by  the  Motilones  Indians.1  Viraratu 
talked  to  these  people  by  signs,  and  related  how  he 
had  left  Brazil,  all  that  he  had  seen,  the  numerous 
villages  he  passed  on  the  river,  and  the  quantities  of 
gold  and  silver  which  they  ought  to  contain.  He  was 
then  sent  to  Lima,  where  the  marquis  of  Canete  heard 
his  story,  and  saw  some  of  the  gold  he  brought  with 
him  ; and  it  was  the  report  of  Viraratu  which  led  to 
the  organization  of  the  expedition  in  search  of  El 
Dorado  and  Omagua,  under  Don  Pedro  de  Ursua, 
in  1559. 2 

I will  now  proceed  to  give  some  account  of  the 
authors  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  narratives  of 
the  expedition  of  Ursua  and  Aguirre  down  the  river 
Maranon,  the  fullest  and  best  of  which,  that  of  Fray 
Pedro  Simon,  has  been  translated  for  the  Hak- 
luyt Society.  The  career  of  Aguirre  is  certainly  the 
most  marvellous  and  extraordinary  in  the  history  of 
South  American  discovery,  during  that  age  of  won- 
ders, the  sixteenth  century  ; yet  the  sources  from 
which  the  story  has  been  derived,  are  authentic  and 
trustworthy. 

I.  The  earliest  account  extant,  of  the  expedition 
of  Ursua  and  Aguirre,  is  contained  in  a manuscript, 

1 They  are  so  called  because  they  have  a custom  of  shaving  their 
heads. — Vasquez  MS. 

2 This  account  of  the  expedition  of  the  Brazilian  Indians  under 
Viraratu,  up  the  Amazon,  is  taken  from  a manuscript  in  the 
National  Library  at  Madrid,  “ Jornada  del  Rio  Maranon , por 
Toribio  de  Ortiyuera ,”  J.  143.  The  handwriting  is  very  illegible. 


XXX 


INTRODUCTION. 


now  in  the  national  library  at  Madrid,  actually  written 
by  a soldier  who  accompanied  them  down  the  Ama- 
zon, and  who  witnessed  all  the  horrors  he  relates, 
until  he  made  his  escape  at  the  island  of  Margarita. 
This  was  the  Bachiller  Francisco  Vasquez,  one  of 
the  three  loyal  men  who,  when  the  mutineers  fore- 
swore allegiance  to  the  king,  boldly  refused  to  be 
accomplices  in  their  treason.1  The  other  two  were 
Juan  de  Cabanas,  and  Juan  de  Vargas  Zapata. 
Cabanas  was  murdered  by  Aguirre,  for  some  imagi- 
nary offence,  soon  afterwards,2  but  Vasquez  effected 
his  escape,  while  the  traitors  were  detained  at  Mar- 
garita.3 The  prefix  of  Bachiller  seems  to  show  that 
Vasquez,  though  in  the  position  of  a private  soldier, 
was  a man  of  some  education  ; and  it  would  thus 
appear  that  men  of  all  ranks  crowded  to  these 
El  Dorado  expeditions,  just  as  they  did  to  the  Sacra- 
mento, during  the  Californian  gold  fever. 

The  manuscript  is  entitled, 44  A narrative  of  all  that 
happened  in  the  expedition  to  Amagua  and  Dorado, 
which  the  governor  Pedro  de  Ursua  went  to  discover, 
with  powers  given  him  by  the  viceroy  marquis  of 
Canete,  president  of  Peru : treating  also  of  the 

mutiny  of  Don  Hernando  de  Guzman,  Lope  de 
Aguirre,  and  other  tyrants.”  It  is  particularly  inter- 
esting, because  it  is  the  source  from  which  Simon 
obtained  his  information, — indeed  page  after  page  of 
Simon  is  transcribed  word  for  word  from  the  manu- 
script of  Vasquez.  No  source  of  information  could 
be  more  authentic.  All  the  remarks,  at  page  21  of 

1 See  page  65  of  this  volume.  2 P.  101.  3 P.  128. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXI 


this  volume,  on  the  sources  of  the  liver  Cocam  a or 
Ucayali ; and  at  page  107  on  the  Marafion,  are  taken 
from  Vasquez,  as  well  as  the  description  of  Aguirre, 
at  the  end  of  Simon’s  narrative.1 

On  the  last  page  of  the  manuscript,  the  following 
notice  is  written : — “ This  narrative  was  made  by  a 
soldier  named  the  Bachiller  Francisco  Vasquez,  a 
soldier  of  the  tyrant  Aguirre,  and  one  of  those  who 
refused  to  take  the  oath  to  Don  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man, as  prince,  nor  to  foreswear  their  country,  nor  to 
deny  their  king  and  lord.  Credit  may  be  given  to  his 
account,  and  to  all  he  writes,  because  he  was  an 
honest  and  upright  man,  and  he  accompanied  the 
tyrant,  who  always  treated  him  very  well,  both  him 
and  the  others  who  refused  to  join  in  the  rebellion.2 
For,  when  the  rebellion  commenced,  the  said  tyrant 
and  Don  Fernando  declared  to  all  the  camp  that 
those  who  desired  to  join  the  rebellion  of  their  own 
free  will  could  do  so,  and  that  those  who  desired  not 
to  join  it  would  not  be  forced  to  do  so  : therefore 
those  who  were  rebels  against  the  lord  our  king  had 
no  excuse,  and  are  deserving  of  the  severest  punish- 
ment.” 

II.  There  is  another  contemporaneous  manuscript 
account  of  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and  Aguirre,  in 
the  national  library  at  Madrid,  by  Don  Toribio  de 


1 Papeles  MSS.,  originales  y ineditos,  en  la  biblioteca  nacional 
de  Madrid.  J.  136  (117  pages,  small  4to). 

2 This  is  not  exactly  true,  for  he  murdered  Juan  de  Cabanas 
(see  p.  101),  and  would  have  done  the  same  to  Vasquez,  if  he 
could  have  caught  him  (see  p.  128). 


xxxu 


INTRODUCTION. 


Ortiguera ; entitled  “ Expedition  down  the  river 
Maranon,  with  all  that  happened  in  it,  and  other 
notable  events,  worthy  to  be  known,  which  happened 
in  the  Western  Indies;  dedicated  to  the  most  happy 
Don  Philip  III,  our  lord.”1  Ortiguera  was  at  Nom- 
bre  de  Dios  in  1561,  and  sent  some  forces  against 
Aguirre.  He  remained  in  South  America  until 
1585,  and  returned  to  Spain  after  an  absence  of 
twenty-five  years.  He  heard  all  the  details  of  the 
unhappy  expedition  down  the  Maranon  from  many 
persons,  and  was  thus  enabled  to  write  a history  of 
it,  which  differs  in  no  material  point  from  that  of 
Vasquez.  It  consists  of  fifty*  six  short  chapters,  two 
of  which  relate  to  the  expeditions  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro 
and  Orellana,  and  all  the  rest  to  Aguirre’s  piratical 
cruise.  This  writer  declares  that,  never  since  the  civil 
wars  in  Peru,  have  such  strange  and  wonderful  things 
happened,  as  in  this  affair  of  the  river  Maranon.2 

1 Papeles  MSS.,  J.  143. 

2 There  is  another  interesting  manuscript,  containing  information 
on  the  river  Amazon,  in  the  national  library  at  Madrid.  It  is 
entitled  “ The  Discovery  of  the  river  of  the  Amazons,  and  its  ex- 
tensive provinces : a report  sent  to  the  most  excellent  Lord  Don 
Garcia  Mendoza  de  Haro,  count  of  Castrillo,  president  of  the 
Royal  Council  of  the  Indies ; by  Don  Martin  de  Saavedra  y Guz- 
man, knight  of  the  order  of  Calatrava,  of  his  majesty’s  council, 
captain-general  of  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  and  president  of 
the  Royal  Audience.  1639.” 

It  is  a well-written  official  report,  in  which  the  captain-general 
states  that  he  has  received  a narrative  respecting  the  river  Ama- 
zon from  Quito,  containing  geographical  and  other  details  supplied 
by  Texeira.  There  is  a curious  coloured  map  with  it. — Papeles 
MSS.,  Q.  196. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXX111 


III.  The  first  published  account  of  the  expedition  of 
Ursua  and  Aguirre,  is  contained  in  the  “ Elegias 1 de 
IUustres  Varones  de  Indias by  the  Presbitero  Juan 
de  Castellanos.  This  writer  was  originally  a soldier, 
and  served  in  the  conquest  of  New  Granada,  but,  like 
many  others,  he  changed  his  life  and  became  a priest, 
first  at  Carthagena,  and  afterwards  at  Tunja,  where 
he  remained  many  years,  writing  his  “ Elegias”  first 
in  prose,  and  then  turning  them  into  verse.  The  first 
part  was  printed  in  Spain  in  1588,  and  contained  the 
exploits  of  Columbus  ; Ponce  de  Leon  ; Francisco  de 
Garay  in  Cuba ; the  conquest  of  Trinidad,  the  Ori- 
noco, and  Cubagua ; and  finally  the  expedition  of 
Ursua  and  Aguirre.  A second  part  followed,  but  was 
never  published  until  1847,  giving  an  account  of  the 
deeds  of  the  German  knights  in  Venezuela,  searching 
for  El  Dorado ; and  a third,  relating  the  conquest  of 
Carthagena  by  Lugo,  of  Popayan  by  Belalcazar,  and 
of  Antiochia.2  The  fourth  part,  containing  the 
conquest  of  New  Granada,  was  never  printed,  and 

1 This  word  here  means  eulogies,  not  elegies. 

2 An  edition  of  the  three  existing  parts  was  published  at 
Madrid  in  1847,  in  the  library  of  Spanish  authors,  edited  by  Don 
Buenaventura  Carlos  Aribau.  The  poet  Alonzo  de  Ercilla  acted 
as  censor  to  the  second  and  third  parts  of  the  work,  and,  in  the 
beginning,  records  his  opinion  that  many  events,  which  he  either 
saw  or  heard  of  when  he  was  in  the  Indies,  are  faithfully  and  truth- 
fully recorded  by  Castellanos,  accounts  of  which  had  never  before 
been  written  by  any  author. 

Ticknor  says,  “ The  whole,  except  the  conclusion,  is  written  in 
the  Italian  octave  stanza,  and  extends  to  nearly  ninety  thousand 
lines,  in  pure,  fluent  Castilian,  which  soon  afterwards  became  rare, 
but  in  a chronicling  spirit,  which,  though  it  adds  to  its  value  as  a 

f 


XXXIV 


INTRODUCTION. 


is  lost ; but  Piedrahita  had  the  use  of  the  original 
manuscript.  No  copy,  however,  has  been  found  in 
modern  times. 

Castellanos  was  a patient  investigator,  and  wrote  in 
a clear  simple  style,  with  an  extensive  personal  know- 
ledge of  the  localities  he  describes.  He  is  by  far  the 
most  genial  historian  of  Ursua’s  expedition. 

The  history  of  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and 
Aguirre  is  contained  in  Parte  i,  Elegia  xiv,  and 
Cantos  ii  to  vii  of  the  work  of  Castellanos.  He 
gives  a tolerably  detailed  account  of  all  the  principal 
events,  and  his  information  was  probably*  derived 
from  the  same  sources  as  that  of  Ortiguera,  namely, 
from  men  who  were  actually  eyewitnesses  of,  and, 
perhaps,  actors  in  the  events  which  they  described. 
Castellanos’  version  of  the  bloody  career  of  Aguirre 
is  remarkable,  because  he  stands  up  as  the  champion 
of  the  unfortunate  lady  who  accompanied  Ursua  ; 
while  all  other  writers,  whether  they  be  men  of  the 
world,  like  Vasquez  and  Ortiguera,  or  greasy  friars, 
like  Simon  and  Piedrahita,  unite  in  heaping  re- 
proaches and  calumnies  upon  her. 

Vasquez  says  that  the  lady  went,  against  the  advice 
of  Ursua’s  friends,  that  she  was  said  to  be  a person 
of  bad  character  and  worse  manners,  and  that  she 
was  the  principal  cause  of  the  murder  of  Ursua 

history,  takes  from  it  all  the  best  characteristics  of  poetry.” — 
History  of  Spanish  Literature , ii,  p.  435. 

Colonel  Acosta,  in  his  history  of  the  discovery  of  New  Granada, 
says  that  Castellanos  is  very  inexact. 

1 Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  says,  with  reference  to  this  poor  lady, 
11  Love  has  destroyed  many  great  captains,  Hannibal,  and  others.” 
— II,  lib.  viii,  cap.  xiv,  p.  495. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV 


Ortiguera  makes  similar  insinuations ; and  Simon1 
copies  from  Vasquez  ; but  Castellanos,  like  the  true 
gentleman  that  he  evidently  was,  defends  the  memory 
of  the  poor  young  lady.  The  truth  seems  to  have 
been  that  Dona  Inez  de  Atienza,  the  beautiful  young 
widow  of  a citizen  of  Piura,  fell  passionately  in  love 
with  Don  Pedro  de  Ursua,  when  he  arrived  in  Peru. 
Pedro  de  Ursua  was  a young  knight  of  Navarre,  hand- 
some, brave,  and  generous,  possessed  of  many  noble 
qualities,  and  universally  liked  ; he  had,  though  still 
young,  already  acquitted  himself  well  in  more  than 
one  post  of  great  danger  and  responsibility,  and  the 
fame  of  his  exploits  had  gone  before  him  into  Peru.2 
Inez  de  Atienza,  a young,  beautiful,  and  spirited 

1 See  p.  13  of  this  volume;  also  p.  36  ; and,  for  the  murder  of 
the  lady  Inez,  p.  87. 

2 Castellanos  thus  describes  him  : — 

a Salio  buen  capitan  y diligente 
Para  le  cometer  qualquier  jornada 

Y ansi,  por  aqui  daba  buena  cuenta 
En  los  negocios  de  mayor  afrenta 
Descubrio  los  caminos  mas  rigorosos 
Allano  la  montaha  rigorosa 
Conquisto  la  provincia  de  los  Musos 
Deste  reino  la  mas  dificultosa. 

Vile  hacer  a la  real  corona 
Otros  muchos  servicios  senalados 

Y en  Santa  Marta  recorrio  la  Sierra, 

Puesto  que  sin  victoria  deste  guerra.” — 

Pte.  i,  Elegia  xiv,  Canto  ii. 

Piedrahita  says  that,  in  his  expeditions,  it  was  not  so  much 
Ursua’s  desire  to  amass  riches,  for  their  own  sake,  to  which  he 
was  always  indifferent,  as  to  reap  the  glory  of  conquering  new 
countries  for  his  king. — Pte.  i,  lib.  xi,  cap.  ix,  p.  692. 


XXXVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


woman,  as  both  Vasquez  and  Simon  allow,  gave  him 
her  heart ; but  her’s  was  no  common  love  ; it  is  not 
every  woman,  gently  nurtured  and  accustomed  to  the 
comforts  of  civilized  life,  who  would  have  willingly 
encountered  the  appalling  hardships  of  a search  for 
El  Dorado,  and  a voyage  down  the  great  river.  At 
all  events  there  is  only  one  other  instance  of  such 
devotion  on  record  : Inez  de  Atienza  and  Madame 
Godin1  are  the  two  heroines  of  the  river  Amazon ; 
they  stand  alone,  and  their  romantic  stories  are  almost 
unrivalled  in  the  history  of  woman’s  love.  The  very 
sublimity  of  this  noble  creature’s  devotion,  which  no 
terrors  could  daunt,  no  hardships  damp,  ought  to 
have  protected  her  from  the  cowardly  sneers  of  dirty 
friars,  and  the  calumnies  of  gold-seeking  adventurers. 
The  lady  Inez  “ forsook  not  her  lord,  in  his  travels, 
unto  death and  her  heroism  and  her  sorrows 
almost  hallow  a love,  which  may  not  have  been  sanc- 
tioned by  a priest.2  If  she  was  guilty  of  any  fault, 
after  the  death  of  Ursua,  which  Simon  asserts,  and 
which  I do  not  believe,3  let  it  be  remembered  that 
the  poor  broken-hearted  girl  was  utterly  helpless, 
and  in  the  hands  of  incarnate  fiends,  with  hearts 
harder  than  the  nether  mill  stone.  That  mad  devil 

1 For  a brief  notice  of  the  adventures  of  Madame  Godin,  see  a 
note  at  p.  liv  of  the  introduction  to  “ The  Expeditions  into  the 
Valley  of  the  Amazons”  (Hakluyt  Society’s  Publications,  1859). 

3 Yet  even  this  is  doubtful ; for  Simon  allows  that  Ursua  took 
the  lady  Inez  to  Moyobamba,  with  the  intention  of  marrying  her, 
and  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  did  not  do  so.  See  p.  13. 

3 See  p.  85  of  this  volume.  I do  not  believe  this,  because  I do 
not  find  it  stated  by  Vasquez. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXV11 


Aguirre  finally  caused  her  to  be  murdered,  because 
her  mattress  would  take  up  too  much  room  in  the 
boat ! and  Castellanos  writes  more  like  a pastoral 
poet  than  a rhyming  chronicler,  when  he  records  the 
cruel  deed  : — “ The  birds  mourned  on  the  trees,  the 
wild  beasts  of  the  forests  lamented,  the  waters  ceased 
to  murmur,  the  fish  groaned  beneath  them,  the  winds 
execrated  the  deed,  when  Llamoso  cut  the  veins  of 
her  white  neck.  Wretch  ! art  thou  born  of  a woman  1 
No  ! What  beast  brought  forth  a son  so  wicked  ? 
How  is  it  that  thou  dost  not  die  in  imagining  a 
treason  so  enormous'?  Her  two  women,  amidst 
lamentations  and  grief,  gathered  flowers  to  cover  her 
grave,  and  cut  her  epitaph  in  the  bark  of  a tree  : — 
4 These  flowers  cover  one  whose  faithfulness  and 
beauty  were  unequalled,  whom  cruel  men  slew  with- 
out a cause.’  ” 

IV.  All  the  authorities  already  mentioned,  namely 
Vasquez,  Ortiguera,  and  Castellanos,  were  contempo- 
raries of  Aguirre.  The  next  chronicler  of  his  career, 
Fray  Pedro  Simon,1  lived  some  years  afterwards  ; but 
his  account  has  been  selected  for  translation  in  pre- 
ference to  the  others,  because  it  is  by  far  the  fullest, 
and  is  equally  reliable  and  authentic.  Pedro  Simon 
was  born  at  Parrilla,  near  Cuenca,  in  1574,  thirteen 
years  after  the  death  of  Aguirre.  He  was  educated 
in  the  convent  of  San  Francisco  de  Cartagena  in 
Spain,  and,  in  1604,  was  sent  out  to  South  America, 

1 u Primera  Parte  de  las  noticias  historiales  de  las  conquistas 
de  Tierra  Firme,  en  las  Indias  Occidentales,  compuesto  por  el 
Padre  Fray  Pedro  Simon,”  &c.,  &c. — Cuenca , 1627. 


XXXV111 


INTRODUCTION. 


to  teach  theology  and  the  arts,  in  the  convent  of  his 
order  at  Bogota.  In  1607  he  accompanied  Don 
Juan  de  Borja,1  the  President  of  the  Audience,  in  his 
campaign  against  the  Pijaos  Indians,  travelled 
through  Venezuela,  embarked  at  Coro  for  the 
Antilles,  and  returned  to  Bogota.  He  also  made 
journeys  to  Antioquia,  Carthagena,  and  Santa 
Martha,  and  conversed  with  some  of  the  conquerors 
and  settlers,  while  many  of  the  incidents  of  the 
conquest  were  still  fresh  in  their  memories,  before 
he  began  to  write  his  history.  He  is  said  to  have 
suffered  severely  from  gout. 

In  1623  Simon  began  to  write  his  “ noticias 
historiales ,”  for  which  he  had  been  collecting  ma- 
terials for  many  years.  The  first  part,  the  only  one 
ever  printed,  appeared  at  Cuenca  in  1627  ; and  con- 
sists of  seven  “ noticias  ’ treating  of  the  affairs  of  Vene- 
zuela, and  of  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and  Aguirre. 
The  other  two  parts,  also  composed  of  seven  noticias 
each,  exist  only  in  manuscript.  The  second  relates 
the  discoveries  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river  Mag- 
dalena, from  Santa  Martha ; and  the  third  relates 
the  conquests  of  Carthagena,  Popayan,  Antioquia, 
and  Choco  ; and  is  said,  by  Colonel  Acosta,  to  be  the 
most  complete  and  most  valuable  account  of  the  affairs 
of  New  Granada  in  the  sixteenth  century,  in  existence. 
Simon  is,  on  the  whole,  a trustworthy  writer ; his 
style  is  simple,  and  without  any  attempt  to  imitate 

1 Grandson  of  the  duke  of  Gandia  (who  was  general  of  the 
Jesuits,  and  afterwards  canonized),  by  his  natural  son  Fernando. 
He  was  president  from  1607  to  1628. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XXXIX 


the  classical  historians ; but  a very  large  proportion 
of  his  first  part  is  taken  from  Castellanos,  and  much 
of  the  remainder  is  copied  from  the  manuscript  of 
Vasquez.  The  time  of  his  death  is  not  known,  but 
he  is  believed  to  have  died  in  Spain. 

Simon’s  account  of  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and 
Aguirre  is  contained  in  the  fifty-two  chapters  of  the 
sixth  historical  notice  of  the  first  part  of  his  work  ; 
which  have  now  been  translated  for  the  Hakluyt 
Society,  and  form  the  present  volume.  His  principal 
authority  was  the  manuscript  of  Francisco  Yasquez, 
one  of  the  companions  of  Aguirre,  from  whom  he 
copies  largely,  and  without  any  acknowledgment. 
He  could  not  have  taken  his  narrative  from  a more 
authentic  source ; and  it  is  possible  that  he  may  have 
conversed  with  other  followers  of  Aguirre,  or  with 
men  who  were  engaged  in  the  campaign  which 
ended  in  the  traitor’s  death. 

V.  The  next  author  who  gives  an  account  of 
Aguirre’s  cruise,  is  the  bishop  Piedrahita.  Lucas 
Fernandez  Piedrahita  was  born  at  Bogota,  in  the 
early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,  the  son  of 
Domingo  Hernandez  de  Soto  Piedrahita,  by  Catalina 
Collantes.  He  studied  in  the  college  of  his  native 
town,  where  he  is  said  to  have  shown  great  talent  for 
poetry,  and,  having  been  ordained,  he  became  trea- 
surer of  the  choir  of  Bogota  in  1654,  and  canon  of 
the  cathedral.  For  several  years  he  was  the  favour- 
ite preacher  in  that  city,  and,  in  1669,  was  appointed 
bishop  of  Santa  Martha,  where  he  lived  in  a simple 
style.  His  clothes  were  often  torn  and  ragged,  so 


xl 


INTRODUCTION. 


that  his  flesh  could  be  seen,  and  he  practised  all  the 
Christian  virtues.  In  1676  Piedrahita  was  appointed 
bishop  of  Panama,  but,  before  his  departure,  the 
buccaneer,  John  Coxon,  landed  and  sacked  Santa 
Martha,  burnt  the  church,  seized  the  bishop,  and, 
refusing  to  believe  in  his  poverty,  tortured  him  to 
make  him  give  up  his  riches.  The  poor  man  only 
possessed  one  jewel,  a ruby  in  his  episcopal  ring, 
which  he  was  forced  to  surrender,  and  he  was  then 
carried  off,  and  brought  before  Morgan,  on  the 
island  of  Providence.1  That  notorious  buccaneer 
not  only  liberated  him,  but  gave  him  some  episco- 
pal robes  which  he  had  stolen  from  Panama,  years 
before ; and  the  poor  bishop  at  length  reached  his 
new  diocese. 

Piedrahita  passed  the  last  years  of  his  life,  convert- 
ing the  Indians  of  Darien,  and  preaching,  not  only 
in  the  churches,  but  also  in  the  streets  of  Panama. 
He  died  there  in  1688,  aged  seventy,  and  was  buried 
in  the  college  of  the  Jesuits,  now  in  ruins.  The 
materials  for  his  history2  were  the  journal  of  the 
great  conqueror  Gonzalo  Ximenes  de  Quesada;  the 
fourth  part  of  the  Elegias  of  Castellanos  ; and  the 
Noticias  Historiales  of  Simon.  His  style  is  pure  and 
clear,  the  events  are  placed  in  chronological  order, 
his  descriptions  of  localities  are  good,  and  he  affects 

1 In  the  Bahama  Islands,  a favourite  resort  of  the  buccaneers  at 
that  time. — Burney , iv,  p.  322. 

2 Entitled  “ Historia  General  de  las  conquistas  del  nuevo  Reyno 
dc  Granada,  por  el  Doctor  Don  Lucas  Fernandez  Piedrahita, 
Obispo  Electo  de  Santa  Marta.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


xli 


allusions  to  classical  authors,  as  much  as  Simon 
neglects  or  despises  them ; but  he  cites  few  autho- 
rities, and  is  inferior,  in  his  method  of  narrating 
events,  to  Simon ; from  whom,  however,  he  copies 
long  passages  almost  literally,  without  any  acknow- 
ledgment, a habit  which  he  may  have  caught  from 
his  predecessor.1 

Piedrahita  does  not  give  any  detailed  account  of 
the  proceedings  of  Aguirre,  until  he  lands  in  Vene- 
zuela ; but  from  that  time  until  the  traitor’s  death, 
the  account  is  almost  as  full  as  that  of  Simon;  and  it 
is  taken,  he  tells  us,  from  Simon,  Castellanos,  and 
that  part  of  the  66  Varones  lllustres  del  Nuevo  Mundo ” 
which  treats  of  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes.2 

Like  Garcilasso  Inca  de  la  Vega,  the  historian 
Piedrahita  was  descended  from  the  Incas  of  Peru  ; 
and  was  thus  the  second  native  of  South  America 
who  wrote  the  history  of  his  country.  His  ancestor, 
captain  Juan  Munoz  de  Collantes,  who  went  out  to 
the  Indies  as  captain  of  the  guard  to  Garcia  de 
Lerma,  the  governor  of  Santa  Martha  in  1528,  was 
a native  of  the  Alhambra,  in  Granada.  He  after- 
wards lived  in  Peru,  and  married  Dona  Francisca 
Coya,  an  Inca  princess,  by  whom  he  had  a daughter 
named  Mencia  de  Collantes.  Mencia  married  Alonzo 
de  Soto,  and  was  the  great  grandmother  of  the  histo- 
rian Piedrahita.3 

1 I am  indebted  for  the  particulars  of  the  lives  of  Simon  and 
Piedrahita,  to  the  notices  at  the  end  of  Colonel  Acosta’s  work  on 
New  Granada. 

2 Piedrahita , Pte.  i,  lib.  xii,  cap.  viii,  p.  566  to  586. 

3 The  royal  family  of  Mexico,  as  well  as  that  of  Peru,  produced 

9 


xlii 


INTRODUCTION. 


VI.  The  last  authentic  account  of  the  expedi- 
tion of  Ursua  and  Aguirre,  was  written  by  a native 
of  Caraccas,  and  is  entitled — “ Historia  de  la  con- 
quista  y poblacion  de  la  provincia  de  Venezuela, 
descrito  por  Don  Jose  de  Oviedo  y Banos,  vecino  de 
la  cuidad  de  Santiago  de  Leon  de  Caraccas.  Primera 
Parte.  Madrid.  1723.”  Oviedo  y Banos  confines 
his  narrative  of  Aguirre’s  excesses  to  the  part  which 
relates  to  Venezuela,  and  his  account  is,  for  the 
most  part,  a mere  abstract  of  Simon.1  There  is  no 
copy  of  this  work  in  the  British  Museum,  but  they 
have  one  in  the  library  at  Madrid.  Mr.  Southey 
says  that  he  could  not,  after  diligent  inquiry,  find  a 
copy  of  Oviedo  y Banos ; yet  I see  that  Robertson, 
in  his  History  of  America , quotes  him  once  or  twice. 

None  of  the  other  old  Spanish  historians  give  more 
than  a passing  notice  of  the  extraordinary  expedi- 
tion which  forms  the  subject  of  the  present  volume. 
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  who  knew  both  Pedro  de  Ursua 
and  Fernando  de  Guzman  personally,  speaks  highly 
of  the  character  of  Ursua,  but  refers  the  reader  to 
Castellanos  for  further  details.2  Herrera  says  little 
more ; and  Acosta,  whose  sources  of  information 
were  almost  as  good  as  those  of  Simon  (for  he  tells 
us  that  a brother  of  his  company,  being  then  young, 
sailed  with  Ursua,  with  whom  he  was  present  at  all 
his  strange  adventures,  and  at  the  pernicious  acts  of 

a historian.  This  was  Fernando  de  Alva  Yxtlilxochilt,  a descend- 
ant of  the  kings  of  Tezcuco,  on  the  lake  of  Mexico,  who  wrote  a 
history  of  the  Chichemecs. 

1 Pte.  i,  lib.  iv,  cap.  i,  p.  173,  to  cap.  ix,  p.  224. 

2 Com . Real.,  Pte.  ii,  lib.  viii,  cap.  xiv. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xliii 


Aguirre,  from  whom  God  delivered  him  to  place  him 
in  the  company  of  Jesuits),  merely  makes  a passing 
allusion  to  the  subject. 

Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  in  his  account  of  the  attempts 
of  his  Spanish  predecessors  in  the  search  for  El 
Dorado,  makes  several  mistakes  when  he  comes  to 
describe  the  cruise  of  Aguirre  j1  and  these  mistakes 
have  been  greatly  amplified  by  numerous  modern 
authors.  The  chief  offender  is  M.  Gomberville,  the 
French  translator  of  Acuna’s  voyage  down  the  Amazon, 
(Paris  1692)  who  interpolates  an  account  of  Aguirre’s 
voyage,  which  must  have  been  invented  by  himself, 
as  it  contains  as  many  mistakes  as  sentences,  none  of 
which  are  to  be  found  in  Acuna’s  original  narrative, 
where  the  expedition  of  Ursua  and  Aguirre  is  very 
briefly  noticed.2  Condamine,  Mr.  Dalton  in  his  his- 
tory of  British  Guiana,  and  other  modern  writers, 
follow  M.  Gomberville,  who  leads  them  far  away 
from  the  truth.3  The  Ulloas,  who  ought  to  have 

1 See  Raleigh’s  Guiana , edited  by  Sir  Robert  Schomburgk,  for 
the  Hakluyt  Society,  p.  23. 

2 See  Valley  of  the  Amazons , p.  48.  (Hakluyt  Society). 

3 It  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate  all  M.  Gomberville’s  errors, 
but  amongst  them  are  the  following.  He  says  that  Aguirre  and 
Guzman  were  in  love  with  the  lady  Inez,  for  which  he  has  no 
authority  whatever ; that  her  name  was  Agnes  or  Anes ; that 
Aguirre  proclaimed  himself  king ; that  he  descended  the  river 
Coca  into  the  Amazon ; that,  when  he  left  Margarita,  he  went  to 
Cumana ; that  he  desolated  all  the  coast  of  Caraccas ; that  he 
then  went  to  Santa  Martha,  and  put  every  one  to  the  sword ; 
that  he  entered  New  Granada,  and  was  defeated  there ; that  he 
was  taken  a prisoner  to  the  island  of  Trinidad ; that  he  had  a con- 
siderable estate  there ; that  he  was  executed  there,  his  houses  razed, 
and  the  sites  strewn  with  salt.  All  these  are  pure  inventions. 


xliv 


INTRODUCTION. 


been  better  informed,  give  a more  erroneous  account 
than  even  M.  Gomberville.  They  say  that  Ursua, 
and  the  greater  part  of  his  men,  were  killed  by  the 
Indians,  in  an  ambuscade  : a misfortune  entirely  due 
to  his  own  misconduct ; and  that  thus  the  expedition 
came  to  an  end.1 

Indeed  the  ignorance  of  late  Spanish  writers,  respect- 
ing what  they  themselves  declare  to  be  one  of  the  most 
memorable  events  of  the  time,  is  very  remarkable. 
Velasco,  the  historian  of  Quito,  gives  an  account 
which  he  must  have  picked  up  from  some  vague  tra- 
dition.2 He  says  that  Ursua  founded  a colony,  as  a 
base  for  his  operations,  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
Sapo,  a tributary  of  the  Huallaga,  and  called  it  Sap- 
osoa  : that  he  started  in  1559,  and  was  murdered  while 
navigating  the  Sapo  by  a soldier  named  Aguirre : that 
the  rock  overhanging  the  river  Huallaga  is  still  shown, 
where,  if  the  day  is  clear,  the  inscription  may  be  dis- 
tinctly read,  which  was  cut  by  Aguirre,  after  he  had 
murdered  Ursua  in  the  Sapo  : and  that  Saposoa  was 
abandoned  a few  years  afterwards. 

This  rock,  mentioned  by  V elasco,  is  still  known  as 
66  El  Salto  de  Aguirre  ’ (the  leap  of  Aguirre).  Soon 
after  leaving  Chasuta,  going  down  the  river  Huallaga, 
the  canoe  passes  “ between  cliffs  of  dark  red  rocks, 
where  the  river  deepens  to  forty-two  feet.  On  one 
of  these  rocks,  appearing  like  a gigantic  boulder  of 


1 Viaje  de  Don  Jorge  Jucm,  y Don  Antonio  de  Ulloa,  lib.  vi, 
cap.  v. 

2 Historia  del  Reino  de  Quito.  Quito,  1789.  Tom.  iii,  lib.  v, 

p.  181. 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlv 


porphyry,  were  cut  rude  figures  of  saints  and  crosses, 
with  letters  which  are  said  to  express  6 the  leap  of 
the  traitor  Aguirre.’  They  were  too  much  worn  by 
time  and  weather,  to  be  made  out.”1  According  to 
the  Mercurio  Peruano  there  is  a tradition  amongst 
the  Motilones  Indians  that  a vulture  lived  on  this 
rock,  and  preyed  upon  travellers,  until  a man  named 
Aguirre  killed  it ; and  the  explanation  is  supposed 
to  be  that  a man  of  that  name  persuaded  the 
people  to  kill  a pirate,  or,  as  the  author  in  the 
Mercurio  Peruano  supposes,  the  origin  of  the  tradi- 
tion is  to  be  found  in  the  murder  of  Ursua  by 
Aguirre. 

Another  tradition  respecting  the  cruise  of  Aguirre, 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Mercurio  Peruano , may 
here  be  alluded  to.  The  Mayorunas  Indians  are  a tribe 
living  on  the  right  bank  of  the  mouth  of  the  Ucayali. 
They  have  thick  beards,  and  comparatively  white 
skins;  and  wander  through  the  forests  as  hunters, 
without  going  much  to  the  banks  of  the  rivers. 
They  are  often  called  Barbudos,  are  very  numerous, 
taller  than  most  other  tribes,  at  enmity  with  all  their 
neighbours,  go  perfectly  naked,  are  well  formed,  with 
straight  noses,  and  small  lips,  and,  alone  of  all  the 
tribes  in  this  region,  are  remarkable  for  their  clean- 
liness.2 

The  legend  is,  that  they  are  descended  from  some 
Spanish  soldiers  of  Ursua’s  expedition,  by  native 

1 Valley  of  the  Amazon , by  Lieutenant  Herndon,  U.S.N., 
p.  169. 

2 Velasco , iii,  p.  108;  Smyth,  p.  223;  Herndon , p.  218. 


xlvi 


INTRODUCTION. 


women  j1  and  it  is  just  possible  that  this  may  be  true, 
for  two  of  the  soldiers  of  Garcia  del  Arze’s  party 
were  lost  in  the  forests,2  and  they  may  have  been 
the  progenitors  of  the  Mayorunas.3 

It  is  very  difficult  to  assign  its  true  place,  in  the 
history  of  geographical  discovery,  to  the  voyage  of 
Aguirre.  It  was  the  opinion  of  most  of  the  ancient 
Spanish  writers  that  the  mutineers  found  their  way 
to  the  Atlantic,  either  by  leaving  the  course  of  the 
Amazon,  ascending  the  Rio  Negro,  and,  by  the 
Cassiquiari  canal,  entering  the  Orinoco,  and  descend- 
ing it  to  its  mouth ; or  by  making  their  way  into 
some  of  the  rivers  of  Guiana.  If  this  was  the  case 
the  discoveries  of  Aguirre  were  both  extensive  and 
important,  but  Baron  Humboldt  and  Mr.  Southey 
saw  no  reason  for  supposing  that  he  ever  left  the 
course  of  the  Amazon.4  The  arguments  for  and 
against  these  two  conflicting  opinions  may  be  stated 
as  follows.  In  favour  of  the  Orinoco  route  there 

1 Mer curio  Peruano , No.  76. 

2 See  p.  14  of  the  present  volume. 

3 The  Jeberos,  another  tribe  of  the  Amazon,  are  also  descended 
from  Spanish  progenitors,  but  on  the  female  side ; their  ancestors 
having  captured  a number  of  Spanish  women,  in  the  insurrection 
of  1599  : so  that  many  of  them  now  have  beards,  and  fair  com- 
plexions. 

4 Mr.  Southey  originally  intended  to  have  inserted  a chapter  on 
Ursua  and  Aguirre,  in  his  history  of  Brazil,  but  the  subject  being 
only  slightly  connected  with  that  country,  he  laid  his  manuscript 
aside.  He  afterwards  published  it  in  the  Edinburgh  Annual 
Register,  vol.  iii,  part  2,  and  finally  reprinted  it  in  a separate 
volume,  which  was  published  by  Longman  in  1821.  Southey  gives 
a full  abstract  of  Simon’s  narrative,  and  also  quotes  Piedrabita  and 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlvii 


are  several  circumstances  which  may  be  urged,  and 
the  weight  of  authority  is  decidedly  on  that  side  of 
the  question. 

After  the  murder  of  Ursua,  the  traitors  wished  to 
return  to  Peru,  but  at  the  same  time  Aguirre  de- 
sired to  avoid  the  supposed  land  of  Omagua,  which 
he  believed  to  be  lower  down  the  stream  of  the  Am- 
azon ; because  he  feared  that  the  soldiers  would  land 
and  settle  there,  and  thus  thwart  his  design  of  re- 
turning to  Peru,  and  upsetting  the  government  of 
the  viceroy,  whom  he  cordially  hated.  He,  therefore, 
“ made  a turn  out  of  the  way  of  their  direct  route, 
and  navigated  three  days  and  a night  in  a westerly 
direction  ;1  . that  is,  judging  from  the  probable 
position  of  the  adventurers  at  the  time,  he  either 
began  to  ascend  the  stream  of  the  Rio  Negro,  or  one 
of  the  branches  of  the  Japura,  which  communicate 
with  it.  Again,  some  days  afterwards,  he  continues 
to  “ direct  his  course  to  the  left,  by  a branch  of  the 
river,  and  navigates  by  branches  coming  from  the 
west,”2  evidently  continuing  his  course  up  the  Rio 
Negro,  until  he  finds  himself  among  the  Arekainas 
Indians,  a tribe  only  met  with  on  the  upper  waters 
of  the  Rio  Negro,  or  on  the  Putumayu.3  All  these 
statements  seem  to  point  to  the  Rio  Negro  as  the 
course  Aguirre  was  taking,  and,  afterwards,  when 
mention  is  made  of  cakes  of  salt  in  an  Indian  village,4 

Herrera ; but  he  was  unable  to  get  a sight  either  of  Castellanos  or 
Oviedo  y Banos,  and  he  had  never  seen  either  of  the  contempora- 
neous manuscript  accounts  of  Aguirre’s  career. 

1 See  p.  76  of  this  volume. 

2 See  p.  97.  3 See  p.  99,  and  note. 


4 See  p.  104. 


xlviii 


INTRODUCTION. 


he  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  approaching  the 
mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  and  that  this  salt  was  ob- 
tained by  the  Indians  from  sea  water,  by  solar 
evaporation.  This  is  all  the  testimony  that  can  be 
obtained  from  Yasquez  or  Simon ; but  Herrera, 
Garcia,  and  Acosta  all  believed  that  the  traitors 
reached  the  sea  by  some  river  opposite  the  island  of 
Trinidad,  and  the  latter  had  his  information  from  a 
man  who  was  actually  in  Aguirre’s  expedition.1 
Acuna,  also,  positively  states  that  Aguirre  did  not 
reach  the  sea  by  the  mouth  of  the  Amazon.2 

But  the  strongest  evidence  in  favour  of  the  Orinoco 
route  is  to  be  found  in  the  way  many  early  writers 
confuse  the  rivers  Orinoco  and  Maranon,  .a  confusion, 
which,  as  I believe,  arose  from  the  conflicting 
accounts  given  by  the  men  of  Orellana’s,  and  those  of 
Aguirre’s  party.  Orellana,  having  descended  the 
main  stream  of  the  Amazon,  gave  a tolerably  correct 
account  of  its  position  ; but  Aguirre’s  men,  having 
reached  the  Atlantic  by  descending  the  Orinoco,  and 
still  continuing  to  call  all  the  water  they  had  seen  by 
the  name  of  Maranon,3  stated  that  its  mouth  (that  is 
the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco)  was  opposite  the  island  of 

1 See  a note  at  page  111  of  this  volume. 

2 See  Valley  of  the  Amazons , printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society, 
p.  49. 

3 The  fanciful  derivations  of  the  word  Maranon,  given  by  Simon, 
Velasco,  and  Manuel  Rodriguez,  will  be  found  in  a note  at  p.  95 
of  this  volume ; and  Simon  erroneously  asserts  that  the  word 
originated  during  Aguirre’s  cruise.  Mr.  Southey,  however,  in  his 
history  of  Brazil,  has  clearly  shown  that  the  name  was  applied  to 
this  great  river,  fifty-nine  years  before  the  time  of  Aguirre.  He 


INTRODUCTION. 


xlix 


Trinidad.  This  especially  appears  in  the  account  of 
the  Jesuit  who  was  Acosta’s  informant;  and  the  con- 
fusion  became  so  great  at  last,  that  Friar  Simon 
declared  that  he  could  not  tell  which  river  was  the 
Maranon,  and  that  it  must  remain  an  open  ques- 
tion, until  some  one  writes  about  it  with  better 
information.1 

On  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  in  favour  of 
Aguirre  having  entered  the  sea  by  the  mouth  of  the 
Amazon,  is  chiefly  negative.  The  time  that  is  stated 
to  have  elapsed  between  the  murder  of  Ursua  and 
the  arrival  of  Aguirre’s  vessels  in  the  sea ; as  well  as 
the  length  of  the  voyage  from  the  mouth  of  the  river 
to  the  island  of  Margarita  ; are  more  in  favour  of 
the  Amazon  than  of  the  Orinoco  theory,  and  it  is 
also  stated  that  the  description  of  the  numerous 
islands,  and  of  the  breadth  of  the  mouth  of  the  river, 
is  better  suited  to  the  Amazon.2  Mr.  Southey  thinks 
it  very  improbable  that  Aguirre  ever  left  the  main 
stream  of  the  Amazon  ; and  Baron  Humboldt,  al- 
though at  one  time  he  believed  that  Aguirre  ascended 
the  Japura,  and  reached  the  Atlantic  by  some  river 
of  Guiana ; afterwards  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
there  was  no  evidence  that  the  traitor  did  not  descend 
the  Amazon  to  its  mouth.  Neither  of  these  two 
eminent  writers,  however,  gives  the  grounds  on  which 
he  formed  this  opinion. 

points  out  that  it  is  used  by  Peter  Martyr  in  his  epistles,  and  in 
the  oldest  account  of  Pinzon’s  voyage ; and  he  thinks  it  was  the 
name  of  some  person  in  Pinzon’s  expedition,  a.d.  1499. 

1 See  p.  109  of  this  volume. 

" See  also  the  note  at  p.  110  of  this  volume. 


h 


1 


INTRODUCTION. 


It  might  be  supposed  that  the  frightful  catastrophe 
in  which  the  expedition  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  was  in- 
volved, would  have  damped  the  ardour  of  the  search- 
ers after  El  Dorado,  at  least  for  a considerable  time ; 
but  this  was  very  far  from  being  the  case.  In  1566, 
only  five  years  afterwards,  one  Martin  de  Proveda 
started  from  Chachapoyas  in  Peru,  close  to  Ursua’s 
point  of  embarkation,  on  a similar  errand.  He  made 
his  way  in  a northerly  direction,  through  dense 
forests,  where  the  great  majority  of  his  men  perished, 
and  eventually  turned  up  at  Bogota : but  there  was 
no  result  from  this  expedition,  except  a rumour  that 
there  were  rich  provinces  to  be  found  still  deeper  in 
the  primeval  forests.  This  rumour,  however,  vague 
as  it  was,  induced  a fellow  townsman  of  Proveda’s,  to 
initiate  another  search  for  El  Dorado. 

This  was  Don  Pedro  Malaver  de  Silva,  a native  of 
Xeres,  who  was  a rich  and  enterprising  man,  married 
in  Chachapoyas.  In  1568,  in  furtherance  of  his 
object,  he  went  to  Spain,  and  received  powers  to 
conquer  Omaguas  and  El  Dorado,  for  a space  of 
three  hundred  leagues,  with  the  government  for  two 
lives.  At  the  same  time  Don  Diego  Fernando  de 
Cerpa  received  a concession  from  the  Boca  del 
Drago,  by  the  mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  to  the  frontier 
of  Silvas  country.  The  two  rival  adventurers  were 
in  Seville  when  news  came  of  the  insurrection  of  the 
Moriscos,  in  the  mountains  of  Granada ; and  Serpa 
was  detained  to  serve  against  them,  while  Silva 
sailed  with  two  ships  in  March  1569,  accompanied 
by  two  brothers,  named  Alonzo  and  Diego  Braba. 


INTRODUCTION. 


li 


Silva  reached  Burburata,  and  marched  thence  to 
Valencia,  in  Venezuela;  but  his  forces  were  dis- 
united, some  went  to  Barquisimeto,  others  to  Tocuyo, 
others  hid  themselves  near  Valencia,  and  the  Barbas 
sailed  for  Carthagena,  having  first  stolen  all  the  wine 
which  their  chief  had  left  at  Burburata.  At  length 
Silva  entered  the  plains,  to  the  south  of  Venezuela, 
with  one  hundred  and  forty  men,  in  July  1569. 

Cerpa  succeeded  in  getting  his  men  away  from  the 
Morisco  wars,  and,  sailing  from  Spain  in  1569,  with 
four  hundred  soldiers,  landed  on  a coast  inhabited  by 
the  warlike  Cumanagotos  Indians,  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Rio  Salado.  Here  he  founded  a city  called  Sant- 
iago de  los  Cavalleros,  where  he  left  the  women  of 
his  party,  intending  to  cross  the  land  to  the  south, 
and  discover  the  Orinoco.  But  the  Indians  attacked 
him  on  the  march,  killed  him  with  their  macanas  or 
clubs,  and  scattered  his  party.  Nearly  all  his  men 
died  of  wounds  or  of  disease,  very  few  escaping  back 
to  Santiago  ; and  the  place  was  abandoned,  the  sur- 
vivors retiring  to  the  island  of  Margarita. 

In  the  meanwhile  Silva  returned  to  Barquicimeto, 
quite  disheartened,  and,  after  visiting  his  home  in 
Peru,  proceeded  to  Spain  with  the  intention  of  try- 
ing some  other  route.  In  1574  he  again  sailed  from 
Cadiz  with  one  hundred  and  sixty  men,  and  landed 
on  the  coast  between  the  mouths  of  the  Orinoco  and 
Amazon,  where  all  his  party  perished,  some  dying 
of  disease,  and  others  being  killed  by  the  Caribs. 
Among  the  sufferers  were  two  little  maidens,  the 
daughters  of  Silva.  Out  of  the  whole  party  only  one 


lii 


INTRODUCTION. 


man  escaped,  named  Juan  Martin  de  Albujar,  who 
was  for  ten  years  a prisoner  amongst  the  Indians, 
but,  after  great  dangers  and  hardships,  he  eventually 
reached  the  mouth  of  the  river  Esquinas,  whence 
friendly  Indians  sent  him  in  a canoe  to  Margarita.1 

At  this  time,  the  great  rivers  and  vast  plains, 
between  Guiana  and  the  feet  of  the  cordilleras, 
having  been  traversed  by  numerous  explorers  with- 
out any  result,  the  fable  of  El  Dorado  and  of  the 
“Gran  Laguna  de  Manoa”  began  to  find  a resting 
place  amongst  the  periodically  inundated  plains 
between  the  rivers  Eupununi,  Essequibo,  and  Parima 
or  Branco,  in  Guiana.  The  last  expedition  which 
can  be  said  to  have  achieved  any  important  geo- 
graphical discovery  was  that  of  Don  Antonio  de 
Berreo,  who  had  married  the  daughter  of  Gonzalo 
Ximenes  de  Quesada,  the  great  conqueror  of  Bogota, 
and,  with  her,  had  inherited  the  duty  of  continuing 
the  search  for  El  Dorado.  He  started  from  New 
Granada  in  1582,  and,  following  the  courses  of  the 
rivers  Cassanare  and  Meta,  reached  the  Orinoco ; 
suffering,  like  his  predecessors,  from  disease  and  the 
attacks  of  Indians.  He  descended  the  Orinoco  to 
its  mouth,  and  proceeded  to  the  island  of  Trinidad, 
of  which  he  became  governor.  There  were  numer- 
ous other  insignificant  attempts,  at  about  this  time, 


1 Oviedo  y Banos.  Humboldt  has  suggested  that  the  lying  tale 
of  the  visit  of  Martinez  to  the  great  city  of  Manoa,  which  led  to 
the  expeditions  of  Domingo  de  Vera,  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  and 
others  of  less  note,  may  have  been  founded  on  the  adventures  of 
Albujar. 


INTRODUCTION. 


liii 


made  by  adventurers  from  Venezuela,  Trinidad,  or 
Margarita,  but  they  all  failed,  and  the  expeditions  of 
our  own  Sir  Walter  Paleigh  and  Captain  Key  mis 
may  be  said  to  close  the  long  roll  of  searches  after 
the  fabulous  El  Dorado. 

As  the  search  for  the  philosopher’s  stone  led  to 
many  discoveries  in  chemistry,  so  the  romantic  ex- 
peditions in  quest  of  the  golden  city  of  Manoa,  and 
the  gilded  chief,  conduced  more  than  any  other 
circumstance,  during  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth 
century,  to  the  extension  of  geographical  knowledge 
in  South  America.  Many  of  these  expeditions  were 
conducted  with  great  skill  and  perseverance ; others 
are  memorable  for  deeds  of  unequalled  heroism ; but 
none  was  so  extraordinary  as  that  which  Don  Pedro 
de  IJrsua  led  down  from  Peru  into  the  great  valley 
of  the  Amazon,  and  which  ended  in  the  sanguinary 
career  of  the  mad  demon  Lope  de  Aguirre. 


SIXTH 

HISTORICAL  NOTICE 


OF  THE  FIRST  PART  OF  THE 

CONQUEST  of  TIERRA  EIRME, 

in  the  Weftern  Indies , 


COMPOSED  BY 

FATHER  FRIAR  PEDRO  SIMON, 
Provincial  of  the  feraphic  order  of  San  Francifco,  of  the 

New  Kingdom  of  Granada  in  the  Indies.  Reader  in  facred  theology, 
native  of  the  province  of  Carthagena  in  Caftile,  and  born 
at  Parrilla,  in  the  Bifhopric  of  Cuenca : dedicated 
to  our  unconquerable  Monarch,  the  greateft 
in  either  the  old  or  new  world, 

Philip  IV,  in  his  royal  and 
fupreme  Council  of 
the  Indies. 


Containing  the  narrative  of  the  expedition  of  Pedro  de 
Urfua , and  of  the  crimes  of  the  tyrant 
Lope  de  Aguirre. 


SIXTH  HISTORICAL  NOTICE 

OF  THE 

CONQUEST  OF  TERRA  FIRMA. 


CHAP.  I. 

1 . Gives  a brief  account  of  the  deeds  of  Pedro  de  Ursua , before  his 
arrival  in  Peru  ; and  of  his  entrance  into  that  country. — 2.  Certain 
Brazilian  Indians  give  information  in  Peru , of  very  rich  provinces 
near  the  river  Marahon. — 3.  The  Marquis  of  Cahete  determines  to 
send  Pedro  de  Ursua  to  explore  them , and  summons  him  to  his 
presence. — 4.  Various  opinions  are  formed  in  Peru  respecting  this 
expedition. 

1.  The  Captain  Pedro  de  Ursua  entered  the  city  of  Santa 
Fe,  in  the  New  Kingdom  of  Granada,  with  his  uncle  the 
licentiate  Miguel  Diaz  de  Armendariz,  the  first  Juez  de  Resi- 
dencia,  who  arrived  there  after  the  discovery  of  the  kingdom, 
and  settlement  of  the  city.1  This  Pedro  de  Ursua  was  a 
native  of  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  and  of  a town  called 
Ursua,  near  the  noble  city  of  Pampluna.  From  Santa  Fe  he 
went  down  to  settle  in  the  town  of  Pampluna,  in  New 
Granada,  and  thence  undertook  the  conquest  of  the  Musos 
Indians,  and  founded  the  city  ofTudela  amongst  them.  He 
afterwards  went  to  Santa  Martha,  and  there  performed  deeds 
worthy  of  his  noble  descent.  From  thence,  having  returned 

1 For  a brief  account  of  the  proceedings  of  Armendariz  and  Ursua,  in 
New  Granada,  see  the  Introduction. 


B 


EXPEDITION  OF 


O 

to  Santa  Fe,  to  give  an  account  of  what  he  had  done,  he 
descended  the  great  river1  to  Carthagena,  intending  to  go  to 
Peru  by  way  of  Panama.  In  the  execution  of  this  design 
he  reached  that  city  at  a time  when  it  was  harassed  by  the 
incursions  which  certain  negro  Cimarrones2  made  almost 
every  day.  The  people  of  Panama,  having  heard  long  be- 
fore of  his  valorous  deeds,  and  of  the  conquests  with  which 
he  had  been  charged ; entrusted  to  him  the  pacification  of 
their  land,  and  the  punishment  of  these  revolted  negroes. 
Having  acquitted  himself  well  in  this  undertaking,  he  con- 
tinued his  voyage  to  Peru,  in  search  of  more  important 
work  than  he  had  yet  been  entrusted  with ; and  arrived  at 
the  city  of  Lima  in  the  year  1558 ; Don  Andres  Hurtado  de 
Mendoza,  Marquis  of  Canete  (worthy  of  eternal  memory) 
being  then  viceroy  of  that  city. 

2.  Certain  rumours  prevailed  in  those  times,  both  in  the 
city  of  Lima  and  throughout  the  provinces  of  Peru  (which 
had  been  spread  by  Indians  from  Brazil),  respecting  rich 
provinces,  which  they  had  seen,  as  they  said,  when  on 
their  road  from  the  coast  of  Brazil,  whence  more  than  2,000 
Indians  had  set  out,  with  the  intention  of  settling  in  other 
lands,  which  might  be  more  agreeable  to  them,  as  their  own 
were  too  crowded.  Others  declare  that  the  Indians  set  out 
on  this  expedition  to  enjoy  human  food  in  those  parts  At 
length,  after  travelling  for  ten  years  with  two  Portuguese  in 
their  company,  some  by  the  river  Marahon,  and  some  by 
land,  they  reached  the  provinces  of  the  Motilones3 4  in  Peru, 
by  way  of  a famous  river1  which  flows  thence,  and  enters  the 
Marahon.  These  Indians  brought  news  respecting  the 

1 The  river  Magdalena. 

2 Runaway  negro  slaves. 

3 A tribe  of  the  river  Iluallaga,  also  called  Lamistas.  They  are  set- 
tled at  Lamas,  Mozobamba,  and  Tarapoto.  They  are  industrious,  em- 
ployed chiefly  in  agriculture  and  the  preparation  of  cotton,  of  mild 
disposition  and  friendly  manners.  Poeppig  Reise. 

4 The  Iluallaga. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


s 


provinces  of  the  Omaguas,1  mentioned  also  by  Captain 
Francisco  de  Orellana,  when  he  descended  this  river  Mara- 
non  after  deserting  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  in  the  Cinnamon 
country.2 

In  these  provinces,  of  which  the  Indians  spoke  when  they 
reached  Peru,  dwelt  the  gilded  man,  at  least  this  name  was 
spread  about  in  the  land,  taking  its  origin  in  the  city  of 
Quito.  It  so  excited  the  minds  of  those  restless  spirits  with 
whom  Peru  was  full,  and  who  were  ever  ready  to  credit 
these  rumours,  that  the  viceroy  thought  it  prudent  to  seek 
some  way  by  which  to  give  employment  to  so  large  a body 
of  turbulent  men. 

3.  Being  aware  of  the  talent  of  Pedro  de  Ursua,  the  Mar- 
quis thought  he  had  found  the  proper  man  to  command  the 
contemplated  expedition,  which  he  intended  to  send  on 
this  discovery,  and  thus  Ursua  might  add  to  the  services 
which  he  had  performed  for  his  Majesty,  especially  in  the 
pacification  of  the  Negroes.  The  Marquis  also  hoped  to 
relieve  the  provinces  of  Peru  of  much  corrupt  blood,  by 
sending  forth  many  idle  people,  who  might  otherwise  cause 
some  fresh  insurrection,  like  those  which  had  already  placed 
this  famous  kingdom  in  danger  ; an  object  which  ought  al- 
ways to  be  kept  in  view  by  those  who  govern,  if  they  would 
avoid  the  lamentable  occurrences  which  had  formerly  taken 
place.  The  Viceroy,  being  determined  to  give  the  command 
of  this  expedition  to  Pedro  de  Ursua,  gave  him  the  title  of 
Governor  of  the  Provinces  which  he  might  discover  and  con- 
quer, with  power  to  appoint  officers,  and  to  reward  his  com- 
panions according  to  their  merits,  recommending  him  to 
have  a care  of  the  conquered  Indians,  to  form  settlements 
consisting  of  such  Spaniards  as  he  might  think  proper,  and 
to  do  this  for  the  good  of  the  church  and  the  crown  of  Spain. 

1 Formerly  a very  extensive  nation,  particularly  on  the  Maranon. 

3 See  the  voyage  of  Orellana,  in  the  Expeditions  into  the  valley  of  the 
Amazons , printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  p.  27. 


4 


EXPEDITION  OF 


He  was  promised,  after  having  founded  such  settlements, 
that  he  should  be  rewarded  as  the  kings  of  Spain  were 
accustomed  to  reward  those  who  had  discovered  and  settled 
new  lands. 

4.  The  voice  of  fame  soon  spread  the  news  of  this  expedi- 
tion throughout  Peru,  and  many  offered  themselves  ; but 
there  were  others  unfavourable  to  it,  of  low  as  well  as  of  high 
degree,  who  questioned  the  propriety  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Marquis  in  patronizing  it,  as  well  as  in  entrusting  Pedro  de 
Ursua  with  the  command ; some  hoping  to  stop  the  expe- 
dition for  particular  ends  of  their  own,  others  on  account  of 
their  envious  spirit  and  idle  disposition,  wishing  to  prevent 
the  accomplishment  of  great  undertakings.  They  said  that  this 
was  not  the  moment  for  the  Viceroy  to  enter  upon  so  large 
an  affair,  the  result  of  which  would  not  be  seen  during  his 
period  of  office,  as  there  was  information  that  he  was  soon  to 
have  a successor  in  Don  Diego  de  Azuedo,  (and  it  was  said 
that  the  Marquis  was  in  no  way  pleased  that  the  King  was 
about  to  remove  him,  in  anticipation  of  his  period  of  ser- 
vice). Such  being  the  case,  Azuedo  would  find  it  most  in- 
convenient, when  he  came  to  discover  that  the  Marquis  had 
taken  a large  sum  of  money  from  the  treasury  to  defray  the 
expense  of  the  expedition,  and  in  the  hope  also  of  benefiting 
himself.  To  these  remarks  others  were  added,  having  no 
foundation,  but  which,  coming  to  the  ears  of  the  Viceroy, 
were  expected  to  have  the  effect  of  cooling,  in  some  degree, 
his  ardour  in  favouring  Pedro  de  Ursua.  These  observa- 
tions had  some  weight  with  the  Viceroy,  until  news  arrived 
that  Don  Diego  de  Azuedo  had  died  in  Seville.  The  Mar- 
quis then  became  anxious  for  the  departure  of  the  expedition, 
and  also  to  reanimate  Pedro  de  Ursua,  who  began  to  fear 
whether  he  could  successfully  conduct  so  important  an  en- 
terprize,  for  his  most  intimate  friends  had  represented  to 
him  the  great  difficulties  that  would  arise.  These  were  so 
many  presages  of  the  unfortunate  end  of  the  expedition. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


D 


CHAP.  II. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  builds  the  brigantines  for  the  expedition,  and  makes 
Pedro  Ramiro  his  lieutenant-general. — 2.  Ursua  leaves  Lima  with 
his  people — he  arrives  at  the  town  of  Moyobamba} — 3.  How  he  con- 
trived to  obtain  two  thousand  dollars  from  the  cura  or  priest  of  this 
place. — 4.  Ursua  sends  part  of  his  people  from  the  Motilones  to 
other  provinces,  where  they  provide  for  themselves. 

1.  While  captains  were  sent  to  hunt  up  people  for  the 
expedition  in  the  vicinity  of  Lima,  early  in  1559,  so  that 
they  might  not  be  detained  for  want  of  means  to  navigate 
the  rivers,  Ursua  proposed  to  construct  vessels.  For  this 
purpose  he  looked  out  for  ship-builders,  and  found  twenty- 
five,  also  ten  negro  carpenters  ; and,  having  manufactured 
tools  and  other  requisites,  he  went  to  the  country  of  the 
Motilones,  whence,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  Brazilians 
had  come,  who  had  given  the  information  which  had  been 
the  cause  of  the  expedition. 

In  this  province  there  was  a Spanish  town  called  Santa 
Cruz  de  Capacoba,2  lately  founded  by  Captain  Pedro  Ramiro, 
who  was  governing  there  in  the  name  of  the  king. 

Pedro  de  Ursua  arrived  here  with  his  people,  and  having 
ascertained  on  which  part  of  the  banks  he  could  cut  good 
timber,  he  went  down  the  river  some  twenty  leagues,  and 
reached  the  desired  spot ; and  having  given  orders  to  his 
officers,  among  whom  was  Juan  Corzo,  his  principal  ship- 
wright, to  build  the  number  of  vessels  he  required,  and 
named  Pedro  Ramiro  as  his  Lieutenant-General,  Ursua  re- 
turned to  Lima,  from  which  place  he  could  dispatch  the 
people  and  soldiers  collected  by  his  captains. 

2.  The  funds  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  were  very  scanty;  and 
although  the  Viceroy  had  assisted  him  from  the  royal  trea- 

] Or  Lamas,  on  the  river  Moyobamba,  which  runs  into  the  Huallaga. 

2 Probably. near  to  the  town  of  Moyobamba. 


6 


EXPEDITION  OF 


sury,  and  money  had  been  obtained  from  other  sources, 
he  had  not  sufficient  for  his  expenses.  This  caused  nearly 
a year’s  delay,  which  would  have  continued  longer,  if  the 
people  of  Lima,  and  others  favourable  to  Ursua’s  views,  had 
not  supplied  him  with  more  money  for  the  equipment  of 
his  soldiers,  purchase  of  powder,  rope,  muskets,  horses,  arms 
and  munitions,  cattle,  ship -provisions,  and  other  things. 

At  last  Ursua  left  Lima,  having  sent  on  the  greater  num- 
ber of  his  people,  as  a vanguard,  and  to  watch  that  none 
deserted.  He  arrived  at  Moyobamba,  where  Pedro  Portillo, 
the  priest,  had  hoarded  five  or  six  thousand  dollars.  Portillo, 
hearing  flattering  accounts  of  Ursua’s  expedition,  and  seeing 
the  great  number  of  gallant  followers,  anxious  also  to  in- 
crease his  fortune  and  dignity,  by  becoming  a bishop  in  the 
new  lands  to  be  discovered,  offered  to  lend  Ursua  two  thou- 
sand dollars,  on  condition  that  he  would  promise  to  appoint 
him  cura  and  vicar  of  the  expedition.  Ursua  gladly  accepted 
the  cura’s  proposal,  and  felt  no  difficulty  in  acceding  to  Por- 
tillo’s wishes  for  ecclesiastical  preferment. 

3.  But  the  priest  soon  repented  his  offer,  and  began  to 
feel  but  little  faith  in  the  success  of  the  expedition.  He  in- 
timated that  the  loan  of  the  two  thousand  dollars  would  be 
inconvenient  to  him;  but  Ursua  could  not  do  without 
money,  for  he  had  ordered  many  articles  for  which  it  was 
necessary  to  pay.  Ursua,  finding  himself  in  an  awkward 
position,  called  into  his  councils  Juan  de  Vargas,  who  was 
afterwards  his  lieutenant,  Fernando  de  Guzman,  Juan  Alonso 
dela  Vandera,  Pedro  Alonzo  Casco,  and  Pedro  de  Miranda, 
a mulatto,  all  fighting  men  and  of  elastic  consciences ; tell- 
ing them  his  present  trouble,  and  that  he  was  most  desirous 
that  the  money  should  be  obtained  from  the  priest.  His 
friends  saw  no  difficulty  about  the  matter,  even  if  a little 
violence  was  resorted  to ; — so  one  night  they  reported  that 
Juan  de  Vargas  (who  was  then  quartered  in  the  church  on 
account  of  two  wounds),  was  dying,  and  one  of  them  went 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


7 


for  the  cura  Portillo,  urging  him  to  lose  no  time  in  going  to 
confess  Vargas.  On  leaving  his  house  the  cura  was  seized 
by  Ursua’s  friends,  and  was  forced  to  sign  an  order  for  two 
thousand  dollars  on  a merchant  of  the  town,  who  was  the 
keeper  of  the  cura’s  wealth.  The  cura  went  to  Vargas,  who 
was  in  an  apartment  of  the  church.  On  his  arrival  fire-arms 
were  pointed  at  his  breast,  and,  without  waiting  for  the 
morrow,  they  took  him  to  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Capa- 
coba.  Here  the  greater  portion  of  the  expedition  was  en- 
camped. At  this  place  they  forced  from  him  the  other 
three  or  four  thousand  dollars  of  his  fortune.  This  system 
of  things  did  not  stop  here ; for  during  the  progress  of  the 
expedition  there  was  much  disturbance,  and  the  turbulent 
paid  for  their  misdeeds  by  terrible  deaths,  as  we  shall  see 
further  on. 

4.  The  chief  part  of  the  expedition  had  reached  the  town 
of  the  Motilones  of  Santa  Cruz,  when  the  Governor  Pedro 
de  Ursua  arrived,  (he  already  took  this  title,  without  know- 
ing where  the  country  lay  that  he  was  to  be  governor  of), 
and  although  this  province  was  fertile,  and  aided  much  in  the 
support  of  the  people,  yet  as  they  were  many,  the  governor 
found  it  necessary  to  send  a portion  of  his  followers  to  a pro- 
vince called  Tubalosas,  not  far  distant,  to  remain  and  provide 
for  themselves  there  until  he  was  ready  to  embark;  assigning 
to  them  as  chiefs  two  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  Francisco 
Diaz  de  Arles,  who  had  been  with  him  in  all  his  actions 
since  they  left  Navarre  ; and  Diego  de  Frias,  an  attendant  of 
the  Viceroy’s,  one  who  had  been  highly  recommended  to 
him,  and  who  was  treasurer  to  the  expedition.  These  two 
had  not  been  friendly  to  the  Corregidor  Pedro  Ramiro, 
since  the  time  when  Ursua  made  Ramiro  his  lieutenant- 
general,  because  they  had  pretensions  to  the  same  post,  as 
they  gave  him  to  understand  to  his  cost.  Although  the 
governor  felt  satisfied  with  the  two  chiefs  and  soldiers,  he 
also  sent  Pedro  Ramiro,  who  knew  the  country  well,  and 


8 


EXPEDITION  OF 


was  feared  by  the  natives.  Ramiro  was  to  go  onwards  to 
the  said  province,  to  make  the  officers  and  men  friends 
with  the  chiefs  and  people,  after  which  he  was  to  return  to 
Santa  Cruz. 


CHAP.  III. 

1.  Arles  and  Frias  are  displeased  at  having  Ramiro  with  them — they 
determine  to  kill  him. — 2.  They  kill  Ramiro. — 3.  The  governor  Ursua 
goes  in  person  to  arrest  the  delinquents. — 4.  He  sends  them  to  Santa- 
Cruz , where  they  are  beheaded. 

1.  Arles  and  Frias  were  very  much  displeased  that  Ra- 
miro had  been  named  as  their  leader,  for  they  hated  him  in 
consequence  of  his  appointment,  as  already  stated  ; but  it 
was  necessary  that  Ramiro  should  lead  the  way  for  a few 
days  on  their  journey,  after  which  they  determined  to  turn 
against  him,  and  to  carry  their  scheme  into  effect,  when 
resting  for  the  night.  The  devil  instigated  the  act  (for  no 
other  could  have  been  the  author).  The  assassins  conferred 
with  each  other,  and  the  evil  genius  who  had  inspired  them 
gave  the  means  also.  They  thought  that  on  account  of  the 
great  friendship  both  had  with  Ursua,  he  would  defend 
them,  or  look  over  any  guilty  action  they  might  commit. 
They  vacillated  only  respecting  the  manner  of  committing 
an  act  which  they  had  decided  on.  In  this  state  of  uncer- 
tainty, two  soldiers,  great  friends  of  theirs,  joined  them. 
These  men  had  separated  from  those  who  had  gone  onwards, 
and  having  missed  Arles  and  Frias,  had  returned  to  look  after 
them.  One  was  named  Grijota,  the  other  Alonso  Martin. 
They  asked  their  officers  why  they  had  left  the  lieutenant, 
who  replied  that  Ramiro  had  dismissed  them,  he  remaining 
with  the  others,  and  intending  to  rebel,  in  order  to  enter 
certain  lands  of  which  he  had  information,  and  settle  them. 


PEDRO  DE  TJRSUA. 


9 


They  added  that  if  Grijota  and  Martin  would  join  them, 
they  would  be  doing  a good  service  to  the  king  and  the 
governor,  by  seizing  Ramiro,  and  so  stopping  the  progress 
of  his  rebellion. 

The  soldiers  did  not  then  see  through  the  intentions 
of  Arles  and  Frias,  which  were  well  cloaked  with  explana- 
tions, apparently  true.  They  agreed  to  join  them,  and  the 
four  continued  on  the  track  of  Ramiro  with  the  intention 
of  putting  their  design  into  execution  on  the  first  opportunity. 

2.  Having  journeyed  a few  leagues,  they  saw  Pedro  Ra- 
miro on  the  banks  of  a rapid  river,  over  which  it  had  been 
necessary  (there  being  only  one  small  canoe  for  the  passage 
of  the  river,  which  was  not  fordable)  to  pass  the  rest  of  the 
soldiers  first.  Ramiro,  who  had  only  one  companion,  the  rest 
having  passed  the  river,  saw  the  four  approach  him.  The 
four,  taking  advantage  of  the  occasion,  saluted  him  with 
bland  words,  very  different  from  the  character  of  their  in- 
tentions, and  he  felt  assured  that  they  were  friendly ; but 
they  laid  hands  upon  him  suddenly  and  disarmed  him, 
while  Pedro  de  Frias  ordered  a slave  he  had  with  him  to 
strangle  him,  which  was  done,  and  then  he  cut  his  head  off. 
The  youth  who  was  with  Ramiro  made  his  escape,  returning 
as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  town  of  the  Motilones,  and 
giving  notice  of  what  had  happened  to  Pedro  de  Ursua, 
who  was  much  distressed  at  the  news.  The  four  mur- 
derers looked  upon  themselves  as  victors,  and  the  canoe 
returning  to  the  landing  place  to  fetch  Pedro  Ramiro,  they 
entered  into  it  and  crossed  to  the  other  side,  persuading  the 
people  that  they  had  executed  Ramiro  by  order  of  the  Go- 
vernor Ursua,  in  consequence  of  his  being  informed  that 
Ramiro  designed  to  rebel  and  take  the  people  with  him. 
This  explanation  sufficed.  The  murderers  sent  one  of  their 
friends  to  Ursua  to  say  that  Captain  Pedro  Ramiro  had  been 
arrested  by  their  orders  on  the  ground  that  he  wished  to 
rebel  and  lead  the  people  with  him,  but  that  they,  as  faithful 


c 


10 


EXPEDITION  OF 


servants  of  the  king  and  his  governor,  had  made  him  pri- 
soner, and  would  detain  him  until  they  were  instructed  how 
to  act  further  in  the  case. 

But  the  truth  had  already  come  to  the  ears  of  the  gover- 
nor, through  the  young  man  who  had  been  with  Ramiro, 
and  he  disbelieved  the  second  messenger ; but  he  dis- 
sembled, and  gave  no  indication  that  he  suspected  Arles 
and  Frias. 

There  were  not  wanting  men,  who,  reasoning  seriously 
on  this  murder  of  Ramiro,  recommended  Ursua  to  get  all 
his  people  together  and  return  to  Peru,  particularly  as 
Arles  and  Frias  had  stated  such  to  be  their  desire. 

3.  The  Governor  was  grieved,  indeed,  at  what  had  oc- 
curred ; he  had  fears  and  suspicions  that  worse  would  sue- 
ceed,  even  a mutiny  amongst  the  soldiers  against  the  four 
murderers  of  Ramiro.  He  felt  ill  at  ease  until  he  decided 
upon  going  himself  with  a few  attendants,  thus  making  no 
show  of  power.  He  trusted  also  to  the  confidence  Arles 
and  Frias  had  in  him ; for  if  they  saw  him  come  with  a 
large  force  (fearing  the  punishment  their  crime  merited) 
they  might  mutiny,  and  instead  of  depending  on  their  safety 
by  reason  of  old  friendships,  there  might  occur  most  serious 
tumults ; thus  in  the  King’s  name,  who  was  so  justly  be- 
loved by  the  good,  and  dreaded  by  the  evil,  Ursua  unex- 
pectedly arrived  amongst  the  people  and  the  murderers,  so 
that  the  latter  had  no  time  to  tamper  with  the  soldiers 
against  the  Governor.  The  four  assassins  hurriedly  collected 
together  what  they  could,  escaping  from  the  presence  of 
the  Governor,  on  account  of  the  shame  they  felt  for  their 
great  crimes. 

Ursua  made  no  show  of  disappointment  at  not  finding  the 
murderers  ; his  plan  was  to  remain  most  tranquil.  He  sent 
to  tell  them  that  they  were  unjust  to  themselves,  being 
men  of  such  qualities  and  gifts,  in  making  themselves  cul- 
pable by  flight,  when  it  was  notorious  that  they  had  ever 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


11 


shown  themselves  diligent  in  their  services  to  the  King  ; and, 
supposing  they  had  overstepped  the  line  of  duty,  they  well 
knew  the  obligations  he  owed  them,  and  that  he  could  serve 
and  favour  them ; that  it  was  better  they  should  return  to 
the  camp,  and  so  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  any 
other  judge,  who  would  punish  them. 

4.  These  and  other  reasons  were  sufficient  to  give  confi- 
dence to  Arles  and  Frias,  and  they  determined  to  present 
themselves  before  Pedro  de  Ursua.  To  assure  them  the  more, 
he  sent  them  immediately  to  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  and 
promised  to  do  his  best  that  they  should  be  set  at  liberty. 
The  Governor  followed  them,  after  having  put  things  in 
order  among  the  soldiers  and  people,  and  appointed  a chief 
over  them.  He  arrived  a few  days  after  the  prisoners,  at 
the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  and  ordered  them  to  be  arrested 
and  secured  as  prisoners.  The  cause  was  tried  by  the 
assessor  of  the  expedition,  with  all  legal  form ; but  as  the 
crime  was  most  grave,  notorious,  and  conclusive,  he  con- 
demned them  to  have  their  heads  cut  off. 

Although  the  sentence  was  notified  to  them,  they  did  not 
believe  it  would  be  carried  into  execution ; for  up  to  this 
point  Ursua  had  been  bland  in  his  conduct  to  them.  They 
considered  that  the  sentence  was  only  nominal,  and  merely 
given  in  conformity  with  his  office  as  judge,  in  order  that 
he  might  be  feared  by  those  he  commanded;  and  that 
doubtless  he  would  allow  them  to  appeal  to  the  royal  au- 
dience at  Lima.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and 
others,  being  aware  of  the  old  friendship,  and  even  relation- 
ship, between  the  culprits  and  the  judge,  thought  that  the 
condemned  would  not  suffer. 

But  the  Governor,  putting  aside  everything  but  justice, 
which  it  was  his  duty  to  administer,  without  exception  of 
persons,  even  of  his  own  blood,  and  in  order  to  make  a pro- 
per example,  commanded  that  there  should  be  no  appeal, 
and  that  their  heads  should  be  cut  off  in  public,  which  was 
done. 


u 


EXPEDITION  OF 


CHAP.  IV. 

1.  People  in  Peru  are  fearful  of  mutiny  in  Ursua' s expedition — a 
friend  writes  to  him  on  the  subject . — 2.  The  governor  sends  two 
parties  of  soldiers  in  search  of  provisions.  One  of  these , composed  of 
thirty  men , goes  down  the  river , more  than  two  hundred  leagues. — 
3.  Garcia  del  Arze,  and  his  soldiers,  fortify  themselves  on  an  island , 
against  the  Indians. — 4.  The  Spaniards  are  most  cruel  to  the  natives 
who  come  peacefully  to  them. 

1.  The  Viceroy  and  Oidores,  as  well  as  the  inhabitants  of 
Lima,  began  to  entertain  fears  for  the  success  of  Ursua’s 
expedition,  for  there  were  in  it  so  many  mutinous  and 
turbulent  persons,  who  had  been  in  the  rebellions  of 
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  Don  Sebas- 
tian de  Castilla,  and  that  of  Contreras ; and  the  number 
of  Ursua’s  followers  was  large,  amounting  to  nearly  three 
hundred  men. 

These  suspicions  increased  daily,  and  were  countenanced 
by  idle  and  evil  intentioned  people,  until  a stop  was  put  to 
them  by  the  news  of  the  execution  of  Arles  and  Frias  by 
Pedro  de  Ursua.  The  Marquis  and  the  Oidores  then  be- 
came more  tranquil,  and  praised  the  decisive  act  of  the  ex- 
ecution, and  the  Governor’s  management,  promising  to  them- 
selves great  successes  on  account  of  the  expedition.  There 
were,  however,  some  superstitious  people  who  said  that  as 
blood  had  been  shed  at  its  commencement,  it  would  end  in 
blood. 

One  Pedro  de  Linasco,  a settler  in  Chachapoias,  and  a 
friend  of  Ursua’s,  accustomed  to  such  expeditions,  and 
well  acquainted  with  many  of  those  who  were  with  Ursua, 
wrote  him  a letter,  in  which  he  notified  to  him  the  suspicions 
of  people  in  Peru  that  many  of  his  soldiers  were  turbulent 
and  mutinous,  and  that  they  might  be  troublesome  to  him, 
and  might  even  kill  him ; that  he  should  have  especial  sus- 
picion of  Lorenzo  de  Salduendo,  Lope  de  Aguirre,  Juan 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


Icy 

O 

Alonso  de  la  Bandera,  Christoval  de  Chaves,  a certain 
Don  Martin,  and  others  whom  he  named,  telling  him 
that  for  ten  or  twelve  men  more  or  less  he  was  not  to  give 
up  his  journey,  and  he  prayed  him  to  separate  those  he  had 
named  from  being  his  followers.  Even  should  he  have  com- 
passion on  them  in  consequence  of  their  poverty,  such  feel- 
ings should  have  no  weight  with  him  ; that  Ursua  should  send 
them  to  him,  and  he  would  take  care  of  them  until  the  Go- 
vernor should  discover  the  lands  he  was  in  search  of,  and 
when  he  thought  it  opportune,  he  could  send  for  them,  and 
do  with  them  as  he  thought  best. 

He  begged  of  him,  as  a friend,  not  to  take  Doha  Inez  de 
Atienza  with  him,  who  was  the  daughter  of  one  Bias  de 
Atienza,  an  inhabitant  of  the  city  of  Trujillo,  and  widow  of 
Pedro  de  Arcos,  an  inhabitant  of  Piura.  Ursua  had  taken 
her,  with  the  intention  of  marrying  her,  as  she  was  a spirited 
and  beautiful  woman.  Linasco  said  that  it  did  not  look  well, 
and  that  it  was  setting  a bad  example  to  his  followers  ; that 
greater  evils  would  succeed  than  he  could  possibly  suppose  ; 
and  that  if  he  determined  to  leave  her,  he  would  give  orders 
that  she  should  be  taken  care  of ; and  this  should  be  done 
in  such  a way  that  Doha  Inez  should  not  know  who  had 
been  the  cause  of  her  remaining  behind,  or  that  Ursua  had 
even  consented  to  it.  This  friendly  letter  had  not  the  de- 
sired effect  on  the  governor  ; who,  although  a man  of  great 
ability,  was  young,  and  without  much  experience.  Thus 
he  did  not  follow  the  advice  of  his  friend,  excepting  that  he 
sent  back  Don  Martin ; neither  did  he  reply  to  the  letter, 
or  do  what  was  advised  therein.  Had  he  done  so  he  might 
have  been  saved  from  death  by  the  hands  of  those  whose 
names  had  been  given  to  him. 

2.  Pedro  de  Ursua,  being  now  in  the  town  of  Moti- 
lones  or  Santa  Cruz,  and  all  his  people  having  arrived,  sent 
one  hundred  men  under  Captain  Juan  Vargas  by  land,  so  that 
on  their  arrival  at  the  river  Cocama,1  they  might  go  up  it 

1 The  Ucayali. 


14 


EXPEDITION  OF 


with  all  the  provisions  they  might  have  collected  in  the 
districts  they  had  passed  through,  deposit  them  at  the 
mouth  of  the  river,  and  await  the  General’s  arrival  with 
the  rest  of  the  people. 

Ursua  likewise  sent  one  Garcia  del  Arze,  a confidential 
friend,  with  thirty  men,  to  a province  twenty  leagues  down 
the  river  where  the  vessels  were  building,  called  Cape- 
ruzos  (on  account  of  a sort  of  hood  worn  by  the  natives), 
that  he  might  collect  provisions,  deposit  them  on  the  mar- 
gin of  the  river,  and  await  the  arrival  of  Captain  Juan  de 
Vargas.  Both  were  to  stop  for  Ursua,  so  that  the  whole  of 
the  expedition  might  go  together  down  the  river.  Garcia 
del  Arze  started  with  his  thirty  companions  on  a raft,  and 
some  canoes,  from  the  place  where  the  vessels  were  being 
built,  but,  from  some  cause  or  other,  he  did  not  wait  for 
Juan  de  Vargas  as  he  had  been  ordered  ; so,  having  collected 
some  provisions  in  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos,  and  from 
other  localities,  he  descended  the  river  for  two  hundred 
leagues,  and  having  suffered  much  from  hunger,  and  en- 
countered great  difficulties  and  risks,  he  arrived  at  a plea- 
sant island  in  the  river,  which  was  named  after  him  the 
island  of  Garcia. 

Among  other  misfortunes  that  occurred  during  the  voy- 
age, was  the  loss  of  two  of  his  soldiers  who  went  on  shore  in 
search  of  food  ; they  entered  a deep  forest,  but  went  so  far 
as  not  to  be  able  to  retrace  their  steps,  and  were  left  behind. 
Such  was  the  scarcity  of  food  that  the  party  could  not  re- 
main long  in  one  place,  and  they  were  obliged  to  eat  small 
alligators,  which  Arze  shot  with  his  arquebuse,  in  the  use  of 
which  he  was  very  dexterous. 

3.  Having  arrived  at  the  island  (inhabited  by  warlike 
natives)  they  found  some  food,  and  for  this  reason  com- 
menced (in  case  the  arrival  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  with  his 
people  should  be  delayed),  to  fortify  a convenient  spot,  with 
thick  posts,  so  as  to  defend  themselves  from  the  continual 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


15 


assaults  of  the  Indians  from  the  land, as  well  as  from  the  river. 
These  were  in  such  numbers  that  had  heaven  not  most 
miraculously  guarded  the  Spaniards,  they  must  have  been 
overpowered,  being  only  thirty  in  number,  and  badly  found 
in  offensive  and  defensive  arms,  for  they  only  had  two  or 
three  muskets,  whilst  the  Indians  numbered  from  two  to 
three  thousand ; nevertheless  the  few  arquebuses  were  suf- 
ficient, seeing  what  havoc  they  made  among  the  natives. 
All  their  shot  being  expended,  Garcia  del  Arze  fired  the 
ramrod  from  his  canribn  at  the  principal  canoe,  full  of  In- 
dians, and  although  they  made  a fierce  assault,  the  Indians 
were  routed,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  them  fell  into  the 
water ; those  who  remained  alive  being  terrified  at  the 
sight  of  the  wounded. 

On  another  occasion,  when  they  were  hard  pressed,  they 
struck  down  six  Indians,  who  suffered  more  from  being 
naked ; but  this  was  the  last  time  they  came  to  annoy  them 
with  their  attacks.  The  Indians  now  considered  it  prudent 
to  make  peace  with  the  Spaniards,  so  one  day  a number  of 
them  presented  themselves,  bringing  food,  and  showing 
signs  of  friendship. 

4.  The  Spaniards  were  suspicious  of  these  signs  of  friend- 
ship, and  thought  that  the  Indians  meditated  treason,  so 
they  determined  to  lay  hands  on  them,  and,  putting  them 
into  a hut  within  the  stockade  (nearly  twenty  in  number) 
they  killed  them  with  their  daggers  and  swords. 

The  news  of  the  cruelties  of  the  Spaniards  w^as  soon 
spread  around,  so  that  at  the  mere  mention  of  their  name 
the  natives  trembled  ; they  fled  from  their  habitations,  leav- 
ing everything  behind,  when  they  knew  that  the  soldiery 
were  in  search  of  them.  Thus  it  was  that  thirty  persons 
were  able  to  maintain  their  position  on  this  island  for  three 
months,  before  Pedro  de  Ursua  joined  them. 


If) 


EXPEDITION  OF 


CHAP.  Y. 

1.  Juan  de  Vargas  commences  his  voyage — arrives  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Cocctma. — 2.  He  remains  here  until  Ursua  arrives. — 3.  The 
brigantines  spring  a leak  when  launched , which  is  unfortunate  for 
the  expedition. — 4.  Ursua  descends  the  river  with  all  his  people , 
arriving  at  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos. — 5.  He  sends  a 
brigantine  to  advise  Juan  de  Vargas  of  his  coming. 

1.  A few  days  after  Garcia  del  Arze  left  the  town  of  the 
Motilones,  Juan  de  Vargas  sailed  with  his  people  in  one  of 
the  brigantines,  and  some  canoes,  down  the  river,  on  the  1st 
of  July,  1560,  to  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos,  whence  he 
soon  passed  onwards,  not  finding  Garcia  del  Arze  there. 
Supposing  he  would  be  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Co- 
cama,1  as  had  been  arranged,  Vargas  continued  his  course 
down  the  river  to  the  mouth  of  the  Cocama,  and  not  finding 
Arze  there,  he  followed  his  orders  to  ascend  this  river  in 
search  of  provisions,  which  he  did  in  his  canoes,  leaving 
the  more  sickly  soldiers  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  in  charge 
of  the  brigantine. 

They  were  twenty-two  days  ascending  the  river  without 
meeting  with  habitations  where  they  could  obtain  what  they 
sought ; after  which  they  fell  in  with  some  native  villages, 
where  they  found  abundance  of  maize.  From  thence  they 
took  many  native  men  and  women  as  servants  for  the  expe- 
dition, as  well  as  canoes  laden  with  maize.  Vargas  now 
descended  the  river  to  its  mouth,  where  he  found  the  people 
of  the  brigantine  suffering  much  from  hunger  and  the  effects 
of  the  climate,  of  which  three  Spaniards  had  died,  also 
many  native  men  and  women  who  were  with  them. 

2.  The  arrival  of  Don  Juan  was  hailed  with  joy,  for  he 
brought  the  remedy  against  so  fearful  an  enemy  as  hunger ; 
but  this  great  benefit  was  soon  forgotten,  for  the  soldiers, 
during  the  two  long  months  they  had  been  detained  here 


This  is  the  river  Ucayali. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


17 


without  occupation,  waiting  for  the  general,  considered  that 
the  delay  of  Ursua  was  inexcusable,  and  began  to  plan  how 
to  leave  this  spot,  which  they  called  the  sweet  sea. 

There  were  two  opinions  or  plans  respecting  a mutiny : 
one,  (and  the  greater  number  were  of  this  way  of  think- 
ing,) was  to  kill  Juan  de  Vargas  and  return  to  Peru  up  the 
river  Cocama ; the  other  was  to  abandon  Vargas  and  go 
on  new  discoveries.  However,  neither  of  these  plans  was 
carried  into  effect,  for  they  were  very  slow  about  the  matter; 
but  they  were  so  secret,  that  it  was  a long  time  afterwards 
before  it  came  to  the  ears  of  Don  Juan,  and  then  it  was 
too  late  to  punish  the  mutineers.  The  spirit  of  dissatis- 
faction ceased  with  the  arrival  of  Pedro  Galeas  and  some 
soldiers,  and  then  came  General  Ursua  with  the  rest  of  the 
party. 

S.  Ursua,  during  his  stay  in  the  town  of  the  Motilones 
or  Santa  Cruz,  understood  how  to  gain  people  to  his  side ; 
and  its  inhabitants  were  won  over  to  follow  him,  leaving 
their  comforts  behind.  He  promised  to  reward  them  largely 
for  their  co-operation,  in  the  countries  which  might  be  disco- 
vered. The  entire  population  joined  him,  taking  their  cattle 
and  property  with  them. 

Ursua  having  now  collected  his  party,  the  vessels  were 
made  ready ; but  on  launching  them,  as  the  timbers  they 
were  built  of  had  not  been  seasoned,  most  of  them  sprang 
leaks  and  were  of  but  little  use,  excepting  one  brigantine 
and  three  flat-bottomed  boats.  This  circumstance  caused  a 
long  detention,  for  they  had  to  build  canoes  and  rafts  to 
hold  the  people ; the  spot  also  was  inconvenient,  provisions 
were  scarce,  and  time  was  an  object.  The  expedition  could 
not  remain  to  make  proper  arrangements  for  the  people  and 
sailors,  or  for  the  transport  of  cattle,  and  the  greater  portion 
were  left  behind  at  the  ship-yard  with  luggage  and  warlike 
stores.  Of  three  hundred  horses,  room  could  only  be  found 
for  forty,  and  of  the  cattle  but  for  few,  the  rest  remaining  to 

D 


18 


EXPEDITION  OF 


run  wild  and  without  owners.  The  people  were  in  such  a 
state  of  ill-humour  that  they  almost  mutinied,  and  wished 
to  return  to  Peru,  so  as  to  save  what  they  had  there ; 
and  this  they  would  have  done  had  not  the  governor,  by  his 
dexterous  proceedings,  arresting  some,  flattering  and  dissem- 
bling to  others,  warning  and  blandly  admonishing  the  whole, 
put  plainly  before  them  the  misery  they  would  experience 
should  they  remain  behind  ; adding  that  on  the  contrary, 
by  going  onwards  there  was  hope  of  fortune,  and  the  glory 
of  being  in  such  an  expedition.  He  added  to  this,  that  he 
wished  them  fully  to  understand  that  his  sorrow  at  parting 
with  them  would  be  greater  than  theirs  at  leaving  him ; 
still  as  a governor  he  felt  it  was  his  duty  to  do  his  best  in 
satisfying  all  of  them,  and  that  God  would  take  them  safely 
to  the  land  whither  their  chief  promised  to  lead  them. 

4.  These  reflections  had  the  desired  effect,  and  no  one  left 
him.  He  embarked  the  people  in  the  brigantine,  canoes, 
and  flat-bottomed  boats,  on  the  26th  of  September,  1560, 
steering  down  the  river.  But  the  people  were  far  from  being 
comforted  for  the  loss  of  their  cattle,  and  the  other  things 
they  could  not  take  with  them,  and  they  feared  the  risks 
they  would  run  in  the  narrow  parts  of  the  river,  and  the 
dangerous  state  of  the  vessels  they  were  in.  The  size  of  the 
river  also  alarmed  them,  lest  they  should  encounter  a storm, 
in  which  they  might  all  be  lost  ere  they  could  gain  the 
shore. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  voyage  they  lost  sight  of  the 
mountains  and  came  into  a flat  country,  and  henceforth  the 
country  continued  to  be  flat  until  they  reached  the  coast  of 
the  north  sea. 

On  the  third  day  the  brigantine  ran  on  a bank,  when 
she  carried  away  a part  of  her  keel ; and  her  cargo  would 
have  been  lost,  had  not  the  men  stuffed  their  clothes  and  wool 
into  the  hole.  They  got  the  vessel  on  shore  and  repaired 
her.  The  voyage  was  then  continued  to  the  Province  of 


PEDRO  DE  URSTJA. 


19 


Caperuzos,  where  they  found  Lorenzo  Salduendo,  who  had 
been  sent  forward  two  or  three  days  before,  in  floats  and 
canoes  with  some  soldiers,  to  collect  food  and  have  it  ready. 

5.  The  governor  was  detained  here  two  days,  awaiting  the 
brigantine,  which  arrived,  after  encountering  many  difficul- 
ties, owing  to  her  leaky  state.  There  was  fear  that  the  cargo 
would  have  to  be  left  behind,  as  it  was  difficult  to  store  it, 
but,  having  done  this  after  two  days’  work,  and  the  pro- 
visions being  divided  among  all  the  people  that  Salduendo 
had  collected,  the  governor  ordered  the  brigantine  to  proceed 
with  all  on  board,  under  the  command  of  Pedro  Alonso 
Galeas,  with  instructions  that,  having  arrived  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Cocama,  he  should  inform  Juan  de  Yargas,  that 
although  the  Governor  might  be  delayed  somewhat,  he 
was  on  his  road  to  join  him,  and  that  Yargas  should  at 
all  events  await  his  coming ; for  Ursua  was  doubtless  aware 
that  Yargas  was  not  well  pleased  with  his  long  detention 
there. 

The  brigantine  got  under  weigh,  and,  arriving  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Cocama,  found  Don  Juan  and  his  men.  The 
arrival  of  the  brigantine  caused  general  content,  which 
was  increased  by  the  news  that  Ursua  would  shortly  follow, 
which  he  did.  He  slept  on  shore  during  the  nights,  fear- 
ing the  navigation  of  the  river  in  the  dark  on  account  of 
banks,  floating  trees,  falls,  and  other  obstructions ; and 
finally  they  arrived  at  a river  which  joins  its  waters  with 
those  of  the  Motilones,  and  is  called  Bracamoros,  its  head 
waters  being  near  the  Motilones,  in  a province  called  Gua- 
nuco.  It  is  named  Bracamoros,  because  it  commences  to  run 
with  some  force  in  a province  of  that  name  (having  pre- 
viously received  many  smaller  streams)  near  old  Guanuco, 
between  Caxamalca  and  Chachapoyas.  It  continues  to  have 
its  powerful  body  of  water  increased  by  the  many  branches 
running  into  it,  so  that  when  it  enters  into  that  of  the  Mo- 
tilones it  has  doubled  its  size.  These  two  rivers  meet  one 


20 


EXPEDITION  OF 


hundred  and  fifty  leagues  below  the  place  where  the  brigan- 
tines were  built,  both  having  previously  run  a course  of 
thirty  leagues  from  their  sources.1 


CHAP.  VI. 

1.  From  the  river  Bracamoros,  the  Governor  continues  his  voyage  to  that 
of  Cocdma , where  he  finds  Juan  de  Vargas  with  his  party. — 2.  They 
continue  their  voyage , some  of  their  necessities  in  the  way  of  food 
being  supplied  by  the  Ilicoteas , and  their  eggs. — 3.  They  arrive 
at  the  island  where  Garcia  del  Arze  and  his  soldiers  are. — 4.  They 
find  some  islands  loioer  down  the  river , with  villages , but  no  inhabi- 
tants, for  they  had  abandoned  them. 

1.  The  governor,  being  detained  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Bracamoros,2  had  sufficient  time  to  go  up  it  in  search  of 
provisions ; but  on  examination  it  was  found  that  even 
higher  up  the  shores  were  uninhabited.  He  therefore  con- 
tinued his  course  for  a hundred  leagues,  arriving  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Cocama,3  where  they  found  Juan  de  Vargas  and 
his  party,  short  of  provisions,  in  consequence  of  the  length  of 
time  they  had  been  waiting  for  the  governor.  They  were  all 
joyous  at  the  meeting,  and,  the  newly  arrived  party  having 
rested  eight  days,  the  expedition  left  that  spot,  with  some 
apprehensions  at  not  having  fallen  in  with  Garcia  del  Arze, 
or  heard  any  tidings  of  him. 

At  a short  distance,  as  they  were  leaving  the  mouth  of  this 

1 Padre  Simon’s  geography  is  confused.  The  river  Motilones , which 
Ursua  descended,  is  evidently  the  Huallaga.  The  Bracamoros  is  the 
modern  Marahon,  flowing  through  the  province  of  Jaen  de  Bracamoros. 

2 That  is,  at  the  junction  of  the  Motilones  (Huallaga)  and  the  Braca- 
moros (Marahon). 

3 Cocama,  or  Cocoma,  a tribe  of  the  Marahon  and  Lower  Huallaga  ; 
of  the  first  missionary  epoch,  1638-83.  They  built  their  huts  round  a 
lake,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Huallaga.  The  river  here  called  Cocama 
is  evidently  the  Ucayali. 


PEDRO  DE  TJRSUA. 


21 


river,  the  brigantine  that  had  brought  Vargas,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  rottenness  of  its  timbers,  began  to  break  up, 
and  became  useless.  This  obliged  them  to  distribute  the 
crew  and  cargo  amongst  the  canoes  and  boats,  which, 
being  overloaded,  were  in  great  danger,  the  more  particu- 
larly as  they  were  in  so  large  a river.  The  river  was  swelled 
by  the  waters  of  the  Motilones,  Bracamoros,  and  Cocama, 
whose  sources,  according  to  some,  are  the  rivers  Aporima 
(Apurimac),  Mancai  (Abancay?),  Nauca,  Vilcas,  Parios, 
and  Jauja,  and  many  more.  Others  say  that  this  great 
river  rises  behind  Chinchacocha,  to  the  east  of  the  Province 
of  Guanuco,  passing  by  the  towns  of  Paucartambo  and  Gua- 
cabamba,  and  uniting  with  rivers  which  come  from  Tarama 
(Tarma?)  and  also  with  many  others  from  the  mountains 
of  that  district,  as  well  as  with  those  that  were  seen  and 
passed  by  the  governor  Gomes  Arias,  in  what  is  called 
Pupanapa  (Bumipampa  ?).  However  this  may  be,  the  river 
of  Cocama,1  which  they  were  navigating,  is  formed  by  all 
these.  It  is  one  of  the  most  celebrated  rivers  in  the  world 
that  has  been  discovered  by  man  up  to  the  present  time 
in  this  region,  and  navigated  by  our  Conquistadores  ; for 
when  it  enters  the  sea,  it  is  without  doubt  the  largest  that 
is  known,  and  leaves  the  Danube,  the  Nile,  the  Ganges,  and 
the  Plata  far  behind,  as  well  as  other  rivers,  celebrated  in 
ancient  and  modern  times. 

2.  This  river  abounds  in  various  species  of  fish  great  and 
small,  also  great  numbers  of  birds  are  on  its  shores,  which 
feed  on  the  fish.  There  are  many  hicoteas  and  turtle,  the 
eggs  of  which  are  laid  in  large  spaces  on  the  sandy  shores, 
where  the  turtle  cover  them  up  under  the  sand,  and  the 
great  heat  of  the  sun  hatches  them  in  due  time.2  The  young 

1 Simon  confuses  the  Ucayali  (Cocama)  and  Maranon  (Bracamoros). 
He  is  here,  of  course,  speaking  of  the  latter  river. 

2 Ilicotea  or  jicotea,  called  by  Wafer  hecatee,  has  been  identified  by 
Gray  with  the  Emys  Decussata  of  Bell.  Another  species,  termed  by 


22 


EXPEDITION  OF 


go  into  the  water,  as  a stone  when  thrown  goes  to  its  centre 
(admirable  provision  of  nature) ; these  animals  are  not  vivi- 
parous, but  oviparous ; and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
cay  manes  (alligators),  which  have  similar  habits.  These 
animals  afforded  food  for  the  people. 

After  six  days’  navigation  down  the  river,  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Cocama,  they  fell  in  with  another  river  on  the  right, 
where  some  Indians  were  fishing,  who,  on  seeing  the  expe- 
dition, left  their  nets  and  fish,  and  ran  into  the  thick  wood, 
with  such  celerity  that  none  of  them  were  caught,  although 
they  were  followed ; but  their  canoes  were  taken  and  all 
that  was  in  them,  with  more  than  a hundred  turtle  and 
hicoteas,  also  many  eggs,  which  gave  much  sustenance  to 
the  people,  who  were  but  badly  victualled. 

S.  Leaving  these  Indian  fishermen  and  continuing  the 
voyage,  they  came  to  the  mouth  of  another  river  on  the 
right,  not  less  mighty  than  the  Motilones,  but  there  was  no 
pilot  in  the  expedition  who  knew  what  river  it  was,  with 
certainty : some  thought  it  was  the  Canela,1  which  rises  in 
Peru,  in  Quijos  at  the  back  of  Quito;  but  afterwards  it  was 
found  that  it  could  not  be  the  Canela,  because  that  river  came 
in  further  down,  and  near  the  island  of  Garcia ; thus  the 
first  mentioned  river  remained  without  a name. 

Eight  days  after  leaving  Cocama,  they  arrived  at  the 
island  of  Garcia  del  Arze,  where  they  found  him  and  his 
companions  in  their  fort,  having  nearly  lost  all  hope  of  the 
arrival  of  the  governor ; but  at  the  sight  of  Ursua  and  his 
people  they  were  happy  indeed,  as  was  the  governor  also. 

Here  they  met  with  Indian  towns  for  the  first  time  since 
they  left  the  Caperusos,  for  during  a voyage  of  three  hun- 
dred leagues  they  had  not  fallen  in  with  one  Indian  village. 

The  people  were  allowed  to  go  on  shore  for  eight  or  ten 

Gray  the  dark  hicotee,  is  named  by  him  Emys  fiugosa.  They  are  land 
tortoises.  See  also  Markham’s  Valley  of  the  Amazons , p.  60. 

1 TheNapo. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


23 


days,  so  as  to  rest  the  soldiers  and  rowers  ; and  also  to  take 
the  horses  on  shore  to  exercise  them,  for  they  had  not  been 
landed  since  they  first  went  on  board.  The  governor  sent 
out  parties  in  all  directions  in  search  of  Indian  towns,  but 
none  were  found. 

At  this  period  orders  were  given  to  supply  the  place  of 
one  of  the  flat  boats  that  had  been  built  of  unsound  wood, 
for  it  could  not  go  farther  than  this  spot. 

Ursua  now  found  himself  tired  of  the  sole  charge  over 
such  a mixture  of  people  as  his  expedition  was  composed  of. 
He  had  not  as  yet  named  his  lieutenant-general  to  assist 
him,  and  he  determined  to  confer  this  office  on  Juan  de 
Vargas,  and  that  of  Alferez-general  on  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man ; but  they  afterwards  repaid  these  honours  by  taking 
away  his  life. 

The  name  of  the  principal  Indian  in  this  place  was  Papa. 
The  natives  were  tall  and  strong,  clothed  in  well  woven 
cotton  shirt-like  coverings,  painted  various  colours.  No 
gold  was  found,  which  produced  dissatisfaction  amongst  the 
Spaniards,  seeing  that  they  had  journeyed  so  far  without 
meeting  with  the  least  sign  of  the  precious  metal.  The  food 
of  the  natives  was  mostly  maize,  of  which  they  make  much 
chicha.  They  also  prepare  chicha  of  the  yuca,  taking  so 
much  that  they  get  drunk,  the  great  sin  of  the  Indians  of 
these  lands.  They  have  batatas  (sweet  potatoes)  and  other 
roots ; beans  and  other  vegetables ; but  their  chief  food  is 
fish.  Their  huts  are  large  and  square  ; their  arms  are  darts 
of  palm  wood  with  points  of  the  same  wood,  like  the  Bis- 
cayan gurguzes , which  they  throw  with  wooden  anietos , 
otherwise  called  estolicas,1  the  principal  arm  of  the  natives. 

A little  below  this  island  the  river  enters,  which  is  called 
after  Francisco  de  Orellana,  or  that  of  the  Canela,  from  that 

1 Estolicas  are  weapons  with  which  the  warriors  of  the  Incas  of  Peru 
were  very  dexterous.  These  estolicas  are  flattened  poles,  a yard  long 
and  three  fingers  broad.  In  the  upper  end  a bone  is  fixed,  to  which  an 


24 


EXPEDITION  OF 


captain  having  described  it.  As  we  have  already  said,  it 
rises  to  the  east  of  Quito. 

4.  Having  increased  the  number  of  canoes  and  rafts  to 
meet  their  wants,  for  much  of  their  cordage  had  already  be- 
come useless,  the  people  also  embarked  thirty-seven  horses, 
three  having  died  there.  They  began  the  descent  by  the 
inner  arm  of  the  river  going  east,  passing  many  islands,  all 
of  them  with  habitations,  although  at  that  period  the  Indians 
had  left  their  homes  and  retired  to  the  woods,  on  account  of 
the  fear  they  had  of  their  unfriendly  neighbours,  Garcia 
del  Arze  and  his  companions,  when  Arze  was  on  the  island 
up  the  river.  Thus  the  expedition  only  found  maize,  greens, 
batatas  half  grown,  some  white  cocks  and  hens  of  Castille, 
also  white  parrots  and  macaws,  things  until  then  unseen,  in 
the  plantations  of  the  natives.  Of  these  they  took  good 
quantity  to  supply  their  necessities,  for  they  were  badly  off 
for  provisions. 


CHAP.  VII. 

] . The  Indians  come  out  to  see  the  expedition  from  a distance , and  a 
chief  comes  with  offers  of  peace. — 2.  The  Indians  come  from  the 
province  of  Carari  with  some  provisions , which  they  barter  for 
trinkets. — 3.  The  governor  sends  an  officer  to  examine  the  country 
inland. — 4.  Punishments  which  Pedro  de  Ursua  inflicted  on  his 
people. — 5.  Opinions  entertained  respecting  this  province , whether 
there  were  one  or  two. 

They  sailed  amongst  these  islands,  taking  possession  of 
the  food  which  they  found  in  the  abandoned  villages,  until, 
after  several  days,  they  suddenly  came  on  one  which  was 

arrow  of  nine  palmos  is  fastened,  with  the  point  of  bone  or  palm  wood, 
which,  worked  into  the  shape  of  a harpoon,  remains  like  a javelin  hang- 
ing from  the  person  it  wounds. — Markham’s  Valley  of  the  Amazons,  p. 
80,  Ilakluyt  Coll.,  1859. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


25 


inhabited,  on  the  mainland,  on  the  right  hand  side,  built  on 
the  cliffs  which  overhang  the  river.  The  Indians  fled  from 
this  place,  as  they  had  done  from  all  the  other  villages.  It 
was  called  Carari,  which  name  was  afterwards  given  to  the 
province. 

Here  the  expedition  rested,  but,  although  many  attempts 
were  made,  the  Spaniards  could  not  lay  hands  on  any  of  the 
Indians ; for, though  some  were  seen  occasionally  at  a distance 
on  the  river,  who  came  out  in  their  canoes  to  see  the  strange 
fleet,  they  always  remained  afar  off,  owing  to  the  fear  which 
they  continued  to  feel.  One  chief  appeared  not  to  feel  so 
much  timidity  as  the  rest,  for,  after  three  or  four  days  he  came 
peacefully,  accompanied  by  some  Indians,  bringing  offerings 
of  fish,  maize,  and  other  food,  and  was  received  by  the 
governor  with  a show  of  great  friendship.  Ursua  embraced 
him,  and  gave  him  a few  trifling  presents,  such  as  glass 
beads,  knives,  looking  glasses,  and  other  childish  toys ; in- 
tending that  the  Indians  should,  by  this  treatment,  lose  their 
fear,  and  that  the  news  might  pass  amongst  them  from  one 
to  another  ; seeing  that  the  Spaniards  had  a bad  name,  owing 
to  the  acts  of  Garcia  del  Arze.  He  thus  hoped  that  their 
confidence  would  return,  and  that  they  would  supply  in- 
formation which  would  enable  him  to  obtain  some  insight 
into  the  nature  of  the  country,  for  he  wished  to  establish 
peace  with  all  the  natives,  along  the  whole  course  of  the 
river. 

2.  Desirous  of  securing  these  objects,  the  governor  sent 
the  chief  away,  very  well  satisfied  with  the  trifles  that  had 
been  given  to  him,  which  were  sufficient  to  cause  rumours  to 
spread  amongst  the  natives  and  provinces  lower  down  the 
river,  very  different  from  those  which  had  previously  been 
spread  concerning  the  Spaniards.  Very  soon  many  Indians 
began  to  come  peacefully,  bringing  provisions,  and  coveting 
such  trinkets  as  the  chief  had  shown  them,  some  of  which 


E 


26 


EXPEDITION  OF 


they  all  received  in  exchange  for  their  provisions  (the  poor 
people  having  nothing  else  to  sell)*  so  that  no  man  was  left 
unpaid*  at  least  so  far  as  the  governor  was  aware.  In  order 
to  prevent  the  knaveries  which  insolent  soldiery  are  in  the 
habit  of  committing  on  these  occasions*  especially  in  dealing 
with  Indians,  he  issued  an  order  that  no  soldier  should 
traffic  with  the  natives*  excepting  through  him*  or  in  his 
presence  ; and  thus  he  succeeded  in  satisfying  the  Indians. 
By  acting  in  this  way  the  governor  endeared  himself  with 
the  Indians ; and  if,  by  chance*  any  soldiers  bartered 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  governor,  they  paid  secretly 
for  the  provisions  which  they  obtained*  with  some  trifles. 
In  this  way  they  sailed  down  the  same  river  for  some 
days*  through  this  province  of  Carari ; and  the  Indians 
never  showed  greater  confidence  in  our  people*  waiting  in 
their  villages  with  all  their  property*  and  coming  out  on 
the  river  in  their  canoes*  to  these  barterings. 

3.  The  governor  saw  how  extensive  was  the  province 
which  bordered  the  river*  and,  desiring  to  discover  whether 
it  extended  far  inland,  and  whether  any  tidings  of  what  they 
were  seeking  could  be  found,  he  nominated  an  officer  named 
Pedro  Galeas*  with  a moderate  number  of  men,  to  march 
inland  and  find  out  what  he  could*  during  a specified  time, 
after  which  he  was  to  return  and  report  his  proceedings. 
The  rest  of  the  expedition  remained*  on  this  occasion,  at  a 
considerable  village,  which  they  found  to  be  larger  than  the 
others*  on  the  steep  ravines  bordering  on  the  river.  Pedro 
de  Galeas  departed  with  his  people*  and  marching  inland, 
along  the  banks  of  a creek  which  communicated  with  the 
river*  they  came  to  a path  leading  into  a dense  forest.  After 
following  it  for  a short  distance*  they  came  in  sight  of  some 
Indians  laden  with  cassava  and  other  eatables.  When  they 
saw  the  Spaniards,  being  astonished  at  their  appearance  and 
dress,  they  threw  away  their  loads,  and  fled  into  the  forest, 
which  being  very  dense*  and  they  having  the  start  and  run- 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


21 


ning  with  all  their  speed,  the  soldiers  were  unable  to  over- 
take any  except  an  Indian  woman.  She  appeared  to  be  of 
a different  nation,  judging  by  her  language  and  dress,  to 
those  who  dwelt  in  the  ravine,  and  the  other  people  whom 
they  had  met  with  on  the  river.  The  Spaniards,  therefore, 
believed  that  she  and  the  other  Indians  had  come  from 
another  province,  to  traffic  with  those  of  the  ravine.  Pre- 
sently they  began  to  ask  her  by  signs,  where  her  country 
was  ; and  she  replied,  in  the  same  way,  that  it  was  six  suns 
off,  that  is,  six  days  journey.  Having  now  finished  their 
provisions,  Galeas  determined  to  return  with  the  Indian  girl, 
to  the  place  where  the  governor  remained.  They  found 
him  in  great  trouble,  because  a soldier  named  Alonzo  de 
Montoya,  a turbulent  and  restless  man,  and  disaffected 
towards  Ursua,  had  collected  others  like  himself,  and  in- 
duced them  secretly  to  seize  several  canoes,  and  to  pull  up 
the  river,  in  order  to  return  to  Peru. 

4.  This  treason  was  disclosed  to  Ursua ; and  Montoya, 
having  before  attempted  to  desert,  was  imprisoned.  But 
Ursua  was  naturally  merciful,  indeed  too  merciful,  and  at 
times  his  acts  savoured  of  weakness.  Sometimes  he  punished 
those  who  deserved  severe  castigation  for  their  turbulence 
and  crimes,  making  them  row  for  some  days  in  the  brigan- 
tines and  canoes  ; when  some  of  the  soldiers  took  occasion 
(for  from  the  commencement  of  the  expedition  some  began 
to  plot  against  the  governor)  to  irritate  those  who  were 
undergoing  punishment,  by  telling  them  that  death  was  far 
better  than  such  disgrace.  These  malicious  sayings  were 
the  sparks  of  the  burning  villainy  which  filled  their  breasts, 
and  could  not  always  be  concealed.  Thus  the  murderers  of 
Ursua  continued  secretly  to  inflame  the  men  (for  they  were 
the  chief  disseminators  of  this  treason)  in  order  to  attract 
more  people  to  their  party,  and  obtain  the  object  of  their 
desires  more  securely. 

5.  It  did  not  appear  to  the  governor  that  the  information 


28 


EXPEDITION  OF 


given  by  the  Indian  girl,  who  was  captured  by  Pedro  de 
Galeas,  was  of  sufficient  importance  to  induce  him  to  continue 
the  search  in  this  province,  for  that  rich  country  of  Omagua, 
the  name  of  which  was  not  even  known  to  the  natives.  He 
therefore  determined  to  continue  his  course,  more  especially 
as  the  fleet  was  badly  provisioned,  and  there  was  cause  to  fear 
that  they  might  be  in  want  of  all  supplies  before  arriving  at 
the  country  of  which  they  were  in  search.  Thus  they  sailed 
down  the  river,  until  they  arrived  at  a place  on  its  banks, 
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues  from  the  island  of 
Garcia.  According  to  the  opinion  of  some,  this  land  and  peo- 
ple are  divided  into  two  provinces,  one  called  Caricuri , the 
other  Manicuri ) Others  believed  that  the  whole  of  this 
district,  extending  for  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues,  was 
one  single  province,  because  all  the  inhabitants  spoke  the 
same  language,  and  wore  the  same  dress  ; besides  the  two 
names  which  the  soldiers  had  understood  as  Caricuri  and 
Manicuri  were  two  villages,  and  not  two  provinces.  This 
region  has  remained  until  this  day  divided  between  these 
two  opinions,  without  any  more  accurate  accounts  having 
become  known.  All  agreed  in  one  thing,  which  was  that 
there  were  few  inhabitants,  for  the  villages  were  small, 
and  five  or  six  leagues  from  each  other  ; and  there  did  not 
appear  to  be  altogether  more  than  ten  thousand  or  twelve 
thousand  Indians,  which  was  very  few  for  so  extensive  a 
province,  and  compared  to  the  usual  population  in  other 
parts.  They  found  amongst  them,  some  pieces  of  fine  gold, 
which  they  wore  round  their  necks,  and  hung  from  their  ears 
and  noses  ; but  the  Spaniards,  passing  so  rapidly,  could  not 
learn  much  concerning  the  customs  or  religion  of  these  In- 
dians. They  only  knew  what  they  personally  saw  and  ob- 
tained in  this  country,  namely,  much  fruit,  many  roots  and 
grains,  which  they  enjoyed ; and  innumerable  quantities  of 

1 Somewhere  between  the  Ucayali  and  the  Yavari,  the  land  of  the 
Ticunas  ; a populous  tribe  of  Indians,  in  those  days. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


29 


mosquitos  of  many  kinds,  especially  the  sand  flies,  Bozingle - 
ros , and  importunate  Xegenes. 


CHAP.  VIII. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  continues  his  course  through  a desert  region , where 
the  people  suffer  from  want. — 2.  They  establish  themselves  in  a village , 
where  they  make  up  for  passed  want  by  a large  supply  of  provisions. 
— 3.  The  governor , on  account  of  the  plentiful  supplies , determines 
to  encamp  in  the  village , pass  Christmas  there , and  make  inquiries 
respecting  the  land  for  which  they  are  searching. — 4.  Fifty  Span- 
iards depart  to  assist  the  chief  of  Machiparo , against  two  hundred 
hostile  Indians. 

1.  Our  people  were  detained  in  this  place  longer  than 
they  had  intended,  because  the  brigantine  had  at  last  gone 
to  the  bottom,  and  they  were  obliged  to  use  balsas  and 
canoes  for  all  the  people  and  the  cargo.  Afterwards, 
not  knowing  whether  this  was  the  last  village  which  they 
would  come  to,  they  departed  from  it  without  any  supply  of 
provisions,  expecting  to  obtain  them,  as  they  had  done  down 
to  this  place,  in  other  villages  lower  down  the  river.  This 
carelessness  was  not  a little  inconvenient,  for  next  day  a 
terrible  feeling  of  hunger  began  to  afflict  them,  which  con- 
tinued during  a voyage  of  nine  days  through  a country 
entirely  uninhabited,  and  during  the  whole  time  they  did 
not  meet  with  a single  Indian.  In  consequence  of  having 
left  the  province  of  Carari  without  obtaining  supplies,  they 
had  nothing  to  eat  during  all  this  time,  except  the  fish 
which  each  man  was  able  to  net  for  himself,  and  a few  turtles , 
hicoteas , bledos , and  verdolagos,  which  they  found  on  the 
banks  ; but  in  very  small  quantities  for  so  large  a party,  and 
in  some  places  they  found  none.  This  misery  increased 
their  weakness  each  day,  and  had  it  lasted  a little  longer 
they  must  all  have  died.  The  whole  blame  was  laid  on  the 


30 


EXPEDITION  OF 


governor,  for  his  improvidence^;  for  had  he  informed  him- 
self of  this  long  tract  of  desert,  he  might  have  laid  in  a 
stock  of  provisions.  The  want  of  food  was  the  reason  which 
prevented  the  governor  from  stopping  to  examine  two 
mighty  rivers  with  turbid  waters,  caused  by  their  flowing 
through  ravines  with  reddish  soil.  They  join  the  main 
river  on  the  right  hand,  in  the  centre  of  this  desert.1  At 
length  they  arrived  at  a village  on  the  banks  of  the  river, 
where  the  inhabitants  were  quite  unprepared  for  the  arrival 
of  their  guests. 

£.  But  they  made  such  good  use  of  their  time,  fearing  the 
evils  which  might  come  upon  them,  at  the  hands  of  those 
who  were  invading  their  land,  that  embarking  all  the  pro- 
perty they  could  collect,  with  their  household  goods,  as 
quickly  as  possible  in  canoes,  they  went  down  the  river, 
leaving  the  fighting  men  in  the  village,  with  their  blow- 
pipes and  arrows  in  their  hands  to  defend  their  houses.  The 
governor,  seeing  this,  collected  together  such  soldiers  as 
were  most  at  hand,  with  their  arms,  and  went  on  ahead  with 
his  arquebus,  approaching  the  squadron  of  Indians  in  mili- 
tary order.  He  made  signs  to  them  with  a white  cloth 
which  he  held  in  his  hand  (after  having  ordered  his  soldiers 
to  give  no  offence),  desiring  to  make  them  understand  that 
no  harm  would  be  done  to  them.  When  the  Indians  under- 
stood this,  without  breaking  up  their  ranks  or  moving  from 
their  position,  one  man  came  out  from  among  them,  who  ap- 
peared to  be  a chief,  with  some  six  or  eight  followers.  He 
came  to  the  place  where  the  governor  stood,  and  took  the 
cloth  with  which  the  signs  had  been  made  in  his  hands,  as  a 
token  of  friendship.  He  and  his  followers  then  joined  the 
Spaniards,  and  they  walked  together  to  an  open  space  in 
the  village  where  the  Indians  were  under  arms ; and  stood 

1 There  are  several  rivers  flowing  into  the  Amazons  from  the  south, 
between  the  Yavari  and  the  mouths  of  the  Putumayu,  but  none  of  any 
considerable  size. 


PEDRO  DE  TJRSUA. 


81 


watching  each  other,  until  the  rest  of  the  Spaniards  ap- 
peared, who  had  disembarked  behind  Ursua.  The  governor 
then,  by  the  best  signs  that  he  could  make,  asked  the  chief 
who  had  come  forward  to  parley,  to  allot  a part  of  the  vil- 
lage, with  the  provisions  in  the  houses,  for  lodgings  for  his 
people ; when  the  Indians,  with  their  women  and  children, 
might  safely  remain  in  the  remaining  part. 

The  Indians  willingly  agreed  to  this,  and  pointed  out  the 
principal  houses  to  the  governor,  where  his  people  might 
lodge ; and  it  was  agreed  that  they  should  not  enter  into 
the  part  retained  by  the  Indians,  nor  injure  them  in  any 
way  on  pain  of  death.  All  our  people  soon  “ took  the  belly 
of  the  evil  year”  (as  they  say),  with  the  plentiful  supply  of 
eatables  which  they  found,  of  maize,  beans,  roots,  together 
with  abundance  of  turtle  and  hicoteas , which  the  Indians 
kept  alive  in  ponds  near  their  houses,  surrounded  with 
pallisades,  and  it  appeared  to  the  Spaniards  that  there  were 
alive,  without  counting  those  which  had  been  recently  killed 
for  food,  more  than  six  or  seven  thousand.  The  Indians 
did  not  feel  much  confidence  when  they  saw  that  the  Span- 
iards were  so  numerous  ; and  each  one,  in  his  own  part  of 
the  village,  began  to  take  the  provisions,  and  hide  them  at 
night  by  little  and  little.  But  they  could  not  do  this  so 
secretly  as  to  prevent  the  soldiers,  who  were  mindful  of  their 
former  misery,  and  anxious  to  avoid  its  repetition  in 
future,  from  searching  for  the  provisions  which  the  In- 
dians were  hiding,  and  taking  what  they  found  to  their 
huts.  The  governor,  seeing  that  this  was  done  in  the  face 
of  fresh  threats,  and  anxious  to  chastise  the  insolence  of 
some  soldiers,  to  overawe  the  rest,  seized  upon  several. 
Among  these  was  a half  caste  servant  of  his  Alferez  General 
Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  and  this  circumstance  was  made 
use  of  afterwards  by  the  discontented,  who  made  it  a point 
of  honour  with  Don  Fernando  that  the  governor  should 
have  imprisoned  his  servant,  telling  him  that  it  had  been 


32 


EXPEDITION  OF 


done  as  an  insult,  or  at  least  that  it  was  a want  of  respect ; 
and  thus  they  worked  upon  him  to  join  their  side,  in  which 
they  afterwards  succeeded. 

3.  There  were  two  reasons  for  remaining  some  days  in 
this  village,  which  was  called  Machiparo1  (the  inhabitants 
being  very  different  in  their  dress  from  those  of  the  pro- 
vince of  Caricuri).  The  first  was  the  great  abundance  of 
eatables,  so  that  the  people  had  a good  opportunity  of  making 
up  for  their  former  hunger ; and  the  second  was  that  Christ- 
mas was  near,  of  the  year  1560.  Ursua  also  desired  to  make 
inquiries  of  the  Indians  of  the  village  and  its  neighbour- 
hood respecting  the  land  of  which  they  were  in  search.  Two 
days  after  their  arrival,  Ursua  sent  the  same  officer  as  before, 
Pedro  de  Galeas,  with  some  soldiers  in  canoes,  to  go  up  a 
creek  which  joined  the  river  at  a little  distance  from  the 
village.  Galeas  entered  by  a small  mouth,  consisting  of 
water  so  black  that  it  terrified  him,  and  seemed  a presage  of 
what  afterwards  happened.  After  navigating  the  creek  for 
a short  distance  they  came  to  a great  lake,  the  size  of  which 
astonished  them,  for  after  they  had  sailed  in  it  for  two  or 
three  leagues,  they  entirely  lost  sight  of  land ; and,  fearing 
that  if  they  wTent  any  further,  they  would  be  unable  to  find 
the  opening  by  which  they  had  entered  (after  having  gone 
along  the  land  for  some  days  without  finding  any  village,  or 
sign  of  inhabitants)  they  determined  to  return.2  While  this 
officer  was  thus  employed,  two  hundred  warlike  Indians 

1 Machiparo  is  mentioned  as  a province  in  Orellana’s  voyage,  and  is 
said  to  be  ruled  by  a chief  named  Aomagua  (evidently  the  Omaguas, 
and  Orellana  mistook  the  name  of  the  tribe  for  the  name  of  the  chief). 
It  is  curious  that  Ursua’s  people  should  not  also  have  heard  the  name, 
when  it  was  the  very  one  for  which  they  were  in  search.  (See  Expedi- 
tion into  the  Valley  of  the  Amazons , Hakluyt  Society’s  Publications,  p. 
27.)  Ribeiro  mentioned  in  1775  that  a chief  of  a tribe  of  Juris , on  the 
Putumayu,  was  named  Machiparo.  Ursua’s  Machiparo  was  probably 
near  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  Putumayu. 

2 There  are  many  large  lakes,  through  which  some  of  the  branches  of 
the  river  Putumayu  flow. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


33 

came  down  the  river  in  canoes  from  the  province  of  Carari, 
to  attack  those  of  Machiparo,  with  whom  they  had  a feud  of 
a very  ancient  date.  They  were  not  aware  of  the  presence 
of  the  Spaniards,  but  came  down  with  great  clamour,  hoping 
to  give  no  time  for  defence,  but  to  assault  and  sack  the 
place  at  their  ease. 

4.  Arriving  with  this  intention  at  the  banks  of  the  river, 
near  the  village,  during  the  night,  and  recognizing  the 
strange  guests,  they  did  not  dare  to  make  an  assault  before 
daylight,  when  they  might  watch  what  took  place  in  the 
village.  In  the  morning  they  saw  that  all  the  Spaniards 
were  there,  and  that  their  expedition  had  ended  in  nothing ; 
so,  raising  great  shouts,  and  making  a noise  with  cornets  and 
other  instruments,  they  began  to  return  up  the  river.  Until 
these  noises  were  made,  the  people  of  Machiparo  had  not 
been  aware  of  their  approach  ; but  when  it  was  known,  the 
chief  went  to  the  governor  and  besought  him,  for  the  sake 
of  the  hospitality  he  had  received,  to  give  him  assistance  in 
chasing  the  enemy  who  had  come  to  kill  him,  and  destroy 
his  village  and  lands.  The  governor  consented  with  plea- 
sure, and,  with  the  rapidity  which  the  occasion  required, 
he  dispatched  his  lieutenant,  Don  Juan  de  Vargas,  with 
fifty  arquebusiers,  in  company  with  the  chief ; who  em- 
barked with  them,  and  some  of  his  Indians  in  canoes,  by 
another  branch  of  the  river.  They  went  so  quickly  that 
they  got  in  front  of  the  two  hundred,  and  surrounded  them, 
without  the  possibility  of  escape.  The  Cararis  were  so 
encircled  that  they  were  forced  to  fight,  believing  that  they 
had  to  deal  with  none  but  the  Indians  of  Machiparo ; but 
when,  afterwards,  they  saw  that  the  Spaniards  had  come  to 
assist  them,  they  began  to  make  signs  of  peace.  This  ap- 
peared an  untoward,  nay  scandalous  thing  to  the  soldiers, 
who  thought  they  might  thus  be  deprived  of  their  spoils  ; so 
they  were  deaf  to  the  prayers  of  the  Indians,  and  began  to 
discharge  their  arquebuses,  and  to  do  the  Indians  so  much 


F 


34 


EXPEDITION  OF 


damage,  that  they  left  their  canoes  and  fled  into  the  woods, 
which  were  so  thick  that,  though  the  Spaniards  and  friendly 
Indians  followed,  they  could  not  catch  more  than  five  or 
six,  and,  with  all  their  canoes,  they  returned  to  Machiparo. 
It  was  understood  that  all  the  Indians  would  perish  for 
want  of  food  in  the  forests,  or  be  killed  by  the  Machiparos, 
having  no  canoes  in  which  to  return  to  their  own  country, 
and  the  road  by  land  being  very  long  ; but  the  truth  could 
never  be  known,  on  account  of  the  few  days  which  the 
Spaniards  afterwards  remained  there. 


CHAP.  IX. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  names  a provisor  or  vicar-general  for  his  fleet,  be- 
lieving he  had  power  to  do  so. — 2.  Some  grow  faint  hearted  at  the 
continuation  of  the  expedition , and  the  governor  encourages  them  to 
proceed. — 3.  Excuses  which  the  mutineers  make  to  Pedro  de  Ursua 
for  their  delinquencies. — 4.  The  mutineers  conspire  to  rid  themselves 
of  the  government  of  Ursua , and  to  make  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman 
his  successor. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  conceived  that  this  land  was  within  his 
jurisdiction  ; as,  according  to  the  conjectures  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians,  and  of  one  of  their  Portuguese  companions,  whom 
they  took  as  guides,  it  was  not  distant  from  the  land  of  the 
Omaguas.  He,  therefore,  felt  it  to  be  necessary  to  regulate 
the  affairs  of  his  government,  which  he  had  not  yet  done, 
especially  as  regarded  those  which  concerned  spiritual  mat- 
ters. Some  priests  who  were  in  the  fleet,  quarrelled  amongst 
themselves  for  want  of  a chief : so  he  determined  to  nominate 
from  among  them  a vicar -general,  who,  in  spiritual  affairs, 
should  have  jurisdiction  over  the  fleet.  He  considered  that 
he  had  powers  to  make  such  a nomination,  in  the  same  way 
as  his  majesty,  whose  person  he  represented,  had  to  make 


PEDRO  DE  URSTJA. 


35 


bishops  and  other  dignitaries ; so  he  selected  for  this  office 
a priest  named  Alonzo  Henao.  This  man  began  to  exercise 
the  duties  of  his  office  by  promulgating  certain  excommu- 
nications against  those  who  did  not  restore  to  Ursua  all 
kinds  of  goods,  live  stock,  tools,  arms,  and  munitions  which 
they  had  taken.  Those  who  envied  the  governor,  publicly 
said  that  he  had  nominated  this  man  to  be  vicar-general,  in 
order  that  he  might  promulgate  those  excommunications, 
and  not  from  zeal  for  the  public  service  ; and  declared  that 
he  had  no  right  to  name  an  ecclesiastical  judge.  All  the 
people  in  the  camp  were  in  this  state  of  excitement  when 
Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas  returned  with  the  news  which  we  have 
related,  and  which  caused  new  doubts  to  arise  respecting 
the  chance  of  finding  the  land  of  the  Omaguas. 

2.  Not  only  the  Brazilian  Indians,  and  their  companion 
the  Spaniard1  whom  they  took  as  a guide,  but  also  others 
who  had  descended  this  river  with  Captain  Orellana,  ob- 
served that  they  had  now  sailed  for  many  days,  that  the 
river  was  of  great  magnitude,  and  that  they  could  neither 
recognize  the  land,  nor  the  place  where  they  had  encamped, 
and  their  accounts  differed  one  from  the  other.  Some  of 
the  evil  intentioned  among  the  adventurers,  who  had  con- 
certed a rising  amongst  themselves,  began  to  spread  a 
rumour  that  all  had  been  deceived,  for  that  they  had  jour- 
neyed more  than  seventy  leagues,  and  had  neither  met  with 
the  rich  provinces  for  which  they  were  in  search,  nor  even 
found  any  sign  by  which  they  might  ascertain  in  what  direc- 
tion to  search.  They  declared  that  it  would  be  best  to 
return  up  the  river  and  go  back  to  Peru,  as  there  appeared 
to  be  no  hope  of  success.  These  arguments,  and  others  by 
which  the  mutineers  spread  their  poison  throughout  the 
camp,  came  to  the  ears  of  the  governor ; who  sent  for  some 
of  the  chief  malcontents  to  satisfy  them,  and  insisted  upon 
the  obligation  not  to  lose  all  hope  of  bringing  their  enter- 

1 Portuguese  ? 


36 


EXPEDITION  OE 


prise  to  a fortunate  conclusion,  and  upon  the  duty  of  not 
giving  up  the  expedition.  He  declared  that  there  was  no 
occasion  for  despair  because  the  expeditions  inland  had  led 
to  small  results ; and  that,  of  necessity,  they  must  suffer 
hardships,  without  which  no  Indian  province  would  ever 
have  been  discovered  or  settled.  Perseverance,  he  said, 
would  overcome  all  difficulties  : and  even  if  it  was  necessary 
to  search  from  youth  until  old  age,  that  this  was  a small 
thing  in  comparison  with  the  attainment  of  such  vast  riches 
as  rumour  had  reported. 

3.  Those  who,  in  good  faith,  had  undertaken  this  expedi- 
tion, thought  much  of  these  words  of  the  governor,  which 
caused  them  to  take  heart  again,  and  they  determined  to 
continue  in  the  enterprise,  and  die  at  their  posts ; but  others, 
who  came  with  different  intentions,  such  as  the  mutineers 
Lope  de  Aguirre,  Montoya,  Salduendo,  and  their  allies, 
seeing  that  they  were  unable  to  attain  their  object  by  these 
means,  sought  out  other  ways  of  exasperating  the  army 
against  the  governor,  saying  that  he  was  a harsh  man,  and 
that  the  mildness  with  which  he  had  begun  to  govern  had 
been  changed  to  severity.  They  did  not  forget  to  add  to 
this  that  he  was  so  weak  as  to  allow  Doha  Inez  to  govern 
the  army  through  him,  and  that  the  soldiers  were  condemned 
to  row  in  the  boats  for  their  crimes,  solely  that  they  might 
row  in  the  canoe  of  Doha  Inez  : that  he  always  made  his 
hut  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  army,  when  he  ought  to  be  in 
its  centre,  because  he  detested  the  company  of  the  soldiers ; 
that  he  was  an  enemy  of  giving  away  and  a friend  of  re- 
ceiving ; that  what  he  received,  he  considered  to  be  offered 
as  an  obligation  ; and  finally,  that  he  was  ignorant  in  affairs 
of  war,  as  well  as  in  those  of  government ; sufficient  reasons 
for  all  the  army  to  hate  him,  especially  when  he  had  said 
that  such  should  be  their  patience  and  endurance  under  the 
greatest  privations,  that  even  the  boys  of  the  expedition 
should  grow  grey  in  it,  if  necessary. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


87 


4.  The  principal  mutineers,  who  went  about  with  these 
sayings  (desiring  either  to  get  rid  of  the  governor  by  killing 
him,  or  by  returning  to  Peru),  were  Alonzo  de  Montoya, 
Lope  de  Aguirre,  Juan  Alonzo  de  la  Bandera,  Lorenzo 
Salduendo,  Miguel  Serrano  de  Cazeres,  Pedro  de  Mirando 
(a  Mulatto),  Martin  Perez,  Pedro  Fernandez,  Diego  de 
Torres,  Alonzo  de  Villena,  Christoval  Hernandez,  Juan  de 
Vargas,  and  others.  They  were  now  resolved,  and  it  seemed 
to  them  absolutely  necessary,  to  elect  another  chief  to  lead 
them  in  place  of  Ursua  ; yet  there  was  no  man  whom  the 
whole  expedition  was  willing  to  obey,  as  they  were  all  of 
low  degree,  and  of  little  note  or  authority  ; for  the  few  who 
could  claim  gentle  origin  were  devoted  to  Ursua ; and  if 
they  were  aware  of  this  treason,  they  would  frustrate  the 
designs  of  the  mutineers.  At  length  they  decided  upon 
speaking  with  the  Alfarez-General,  Don  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man, who  was  held  to  be  of  noble  blood,  and  well  disposed 
towards  the  soldiers  ; so,  entering  by  the  door  of  ambition 
(which  is  always  open)  they  offered  to  put  his  hands  into  it, 
up  to  the  elbows,  by  making  him  the  successor  of  Pedro  de 
Ursua.  The  mutineers  whose  names  we  have  mentioned, 
having  determined  upon  this,  spoke  with  him  one  night,  and 
disclosed  their  intentions  to  him,  saying  that  they  were 
founded  in  a holy  zeal  (there  is  no  greater  crime  than  that 
which  is  done  under  the  mask  of  religion !)  and  that  their 
designs  would  be  for  the  good  of  the  expedition,  and  espe- 
cially for  the  service  of  God  and  the  king.  They  told  him 
that  he  should  accept  the  office,  for  that  his  birth  and 
merits  were  worthy  of  greater  honours  ; that  the  miseries 
occasioned  by  the  injustice  of  Ursua  were  notorious;  and 
that  if  his  rule  continued  much  longer,  it  would  be  the 
occasion  of  infinite  damage  to  the  king’s  service.  They 
pressed  these  arguments  upon  him,  saying  that  he  had  been 
insulted  by  the  arrest  of  his  servant,  without  respect  for  his 
noble  blood,  nor  for  his  office  of  Alferez-General ; and  that 


38 


EXPEDITION  OF 


if  this  scheme  were  successful,  and  he  took  the  office  of 
general,  with  the  consent  of  all  the  people,  then,  by  his 
good  government  and  arrangements,  they  would  discover 
the  land  for  which  they  were  in  search,  and,  having  settled 
it,  his  majesty  would  consider  it  a good  service,  and  would 
specially  reward  him.  If  it  should  appear  best  to  all  not  to 
kill  the  governor,  but  to  leave  him  in  that  village,  with  some 
of  his  friends,  it  might  be  done,  as  it  would  not  cause  so 
much  scandal  to  the  world,  as  his  death. 


CHAP.  X. 

1.  The  mutineers  determine  to  kill  the  governor , Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  to 
return  to  Peru. — 2.  Mysterious  warning  of  the  death  of  Ursua, 
which  was  seen  and  heard  by  a knight  of  the  order  of  San  Juan. — 
3.  They  continue  their  course  from  this  village  to  another  lower  down , 
of  the  same  name.  A slave  of  one  of  the  mutineers  discovers  their 
design,  and  attempts  to  warn  the  governor.  The  mutineers  kill  the 
governor  Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  his  lieutenant. 

Don  Fernando  did  not  dislike  the  arguments  of  the  muti- 
neers, nor  was  he  deterred  either  by  the  grave  embarrass- 
ments which  might  follow,  nor  by  the  loyalty  which  (he 
being  a knight)  should  have  bound  him  to  protect  Ursua, 
after  the  honours  he  had  received  from  him,  and  the  con- 
sideration with  which  he  had  always  been  treated  by  him. 
He  believed  all  that  had  been  told  him  by  the  mutineers, 
and,  swelled  up  by  the  wind  of  ambition,  he  gave  them 
thanks  for  what  they  had  offered  him,  and  assented  to  all 
their  projects  ; so  that  it  appeared  to  the  messengers  that 
they  now  had  all  that  was  necessary,  in  order  to  put  their 
designs  into  execution.  The  mutineers,  and  Don  Fernando 
among  them,  as  their  chief,  conferred  together,  and  began 
to  offer  various  opinions  (children  of  tyranny  and  heresy) 


PEDRO  DE  TJRSUA. 


39 


respecting  the  mode  of  proceeding  ; to  some  it  seemed  best 
to  leave  Pedro  de  Ursua,  with  some  of  his  friends  in  that 
place  (as  had  been  suggested  to  Don  Fernando)  and,  taking 
all  the  boats  and  canoes,  to  return  up  the  river  to  Peru : 
others,  among  whom  were  Don  Fernando,  said  that  they 
would  only  do  that  which  had  been  originally  proposed, 
namely,  return  to  Peru  by  descending  the  river,  with  the 
whole  expedition,  leaving  Ursua  behind  : but  there  was  a 
third  party,  among  whom  were  those  two  good  souls,  Lope 
de  Aguirre  and  Lorenzo  Salduendo,  who  declared  that  all 
they  had  heard  was  unwise,  but  that  the  only  plan  was  to 
kill  Pedro  de  Ursua  and,  with  all  the  people,  return  to  Peru, 
and  make  Don  Fernando  the  lord  of  the  country.  Don 
Fernando,  giving  reins  to  an  ambition  which  he  was  already 
relishing,  and  promising  to  himself  the  enjoyment  of  the 
riches  of  Peru,  also  because  it  was  of  little  avail  to  say  any- 
thing else,  gave  out  that  the  opinions  of  the  two  (Aguirre 
and  Salduendo)  appeared  good  to  him ; and  the  rest  con- 
senting, it  was  agreed  that  Ursua  and  his  lieutenant  Don 
Juan  should  die.  From  this  time  they  sought  for  an  occa- 
sion to  commit  the  deed,  and  busied  themselves  in  gaining 
over  the  soldiers,  that  they  might  be  on  their  side,  when  it 
became  necessary. 

2.  Omens  were  not  wanting,  which  might  have  served  as 
warnings  to  Ursua ; for,  besides  those  we  have  mentioned, 
(seeing  that  some,  with  small  reason,  had  predicted  the  fate 
of  the  expedition)  on  the  same  day  that  the  mutineers 
resolved  upon  the  murder,  and  five  before  it  was  perpetrated, 
being  one  of  those  of  the  feast  of  the  Nativity  (for  in  this 
way  did  these  men  celebrate  it),  a comendador  of  the  order 
of  San  Juan,  named  Juan  Gomez  de  Guevara,  a great  friend 
of  Ursua’s,  ripe  in  years,  of  grave  demeanour,  and  strictly 
honest  and  true,  whilst  he  was  out  walking,  at  the  second  or 
third  hour  of  the  night,  enjoying  the  freshness  of  the  air 
near  the  door  of  his  hut,  which  was  next  to  that  of  the 


40 


EXPEDITION  OF 


governor,  beheld  something  like  a shade  passing  near  the 
governor’s  hut,  from  which  a rough  and  unknown  voice  pro- 
ceeded, which  said — “ Pedro  de  Ursua,  governor  of  Omagua 
and  of  El  Dorado,  God  pardon  thee!”  The  comendador 
hurried  to  the  spot  where  he  had  seen  the  object,  and  heard 
the  voice,  but  it  had  disappeared  without  leaving  a trace  of 
what  it  was ; he  could  not,  however,  persuade  himself  that  what 
he  had  seen  was  a human  being,  and  he  remained  in  a state 
of  astonishment  and  confusion.  He  communicated  what  he 
had  seen  to  some  of  his  friends,  and  conferred  with  them  on 
the  propriety  of  informing  the  governor ; but  they  deter- 
mined not  to  do  so,  considering  that,  as  he  was  in  a bad 
state  of  health,  this  might  aggravate  his  illness  and  cause 
him  to  believe  that  his  time  was  come. 

S.  The  governor  was  more  careless  than  he  ought  to  have 
been  (while  these  things  were  passing  amongst  the  muti- 
neers), considering  that  he  was  not  without  friends  who 
desired  to  put  him  on  his  guard  (though  none  of  them 
believed  that  things  had  become  so  serious),  and  that  he 
should  always  have  had  a guard  about  his  person,  of  soldiers 
and  friends.  He,  however,  did  not  hearken  to  their  advice, 
nor  cause  a guard  to  be  in  attendance,  which  led  men  to  say 
that  he  wished  to  be  alone  with  Doha  Inez,  and  without 
witnesses.  However  that  may  be,  either  from  carelessness, 
or  too  much  confidence,  he  never  had  any  one,  either  within 
or  without  his  house,  but  his  pages.  Although  the  mutineers 
were  on  the  watch,  without  losing  any  opportunity,  they 
were  unable  to  perpetrate  the  deed  while  they  remained  in 
this  village  of  Machiparo,  which  they  left  on  the  day  after 
Christmas.  They  sailed  all  day,  until  sunset,  when  they 
reached  another  village  of  the  same  name,  six  or  eight 
leagues  distant.  This  village  had  been  abandoned  by  its 
inhabitants,  who  had  fled  from  the  fear  they  had  of  our 
people,  who  took  up  their  abode  there,  without  any  obstacle 
being  made.  The  governor  now  became  anxious,  as  it 


PEDRO  DE  TJRSUA. 


41 


appeared  to  him  (according  to  the  report  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians)  that  they  must  be  near  the  place  where  they  might 
hear  news  of  the  province  of  the  Omaguas.  He  was  shown  a 
broad  road  which  led  from  the  village  towards  the  interior, 
(as  it  was  said)  to  a large  city  or  province;  so  he  determined 
to  send  a party  of  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  one  Sancho 
Pizarro,  to  discover  this  new  land. 

4.  The  mutineers  considered  that  this  opportunity  ought 
not  to  be  lost,  when  so  many  of  the  governor’s  friends  were 
absent  with  this  expedition,  and  they  resolved  that  he  should 
be  killed  without  loss  of  time.  They  consulted  together  on 
the  morning  of  New  Year’s  day,  and  determined  to  perpe- 
trate the  murder  that  evening,  when  the  governor,  on  so 
solemn  an  occasion,  would  be  enjoying  himself,  and  off  his 
guard.  The  movements  of  the  mutineers  were  not  so  secret 
but  that  a black  slave  of  Juan  Alonzo  de  la  Bandera,  called 
Juan  Primero  (through  an  inspiration  of  heaven,  or  moved 
by  the  atrocity  of  the  meditated  act,  or  perhaps  thinking 
that,  by  imparting  the  secret,  he  would  be  set  free)  made 
an  excuse  to  go  to  the  lodging  of  the  governor,  to  give 
him  an  account  of  what  was  passing.  But  this  circumstance 
did  not  stop  the  blow  levelled  at  Ursua,  who  was  then  with 
Doha  Ines  ; so  that  the  slave  could  not  communicate  with 
him  personally,  neither  could  he  await  the  governor’s 
appearance,  for  fear  of  being  missed  by  his  master.  Still 
the  slave  did  his  best,  by  telling  the  object  of  his  coming  to 
another  negro,  the  slave  of  Ursua,  and  directing  him  to  in- 
form his  master.  The  governor’s  slave  either  forgot  to 
deliver  the  message  or,  fearing  to  tell  his  master,  the  day 
passed  without  Ursua  being  aware  of  what  was  going  on. 

5.  The  night  arrived  (the  cloak  to  sinners),  when  all  the 
conspirators  met  at  Don  Fernando’s  lodging  (so  as  to  be 
more  secure)  and  sent  a Mestizo  servant,  as  an  excuse,  for 
some  oil,  so  that  he  might  see  who  was  with  the  governor 
and  what  he  was  doing.  The  servant  went,  and  having  pro- 

G 


42 


EXPEDITION  OF 


cured  what  he  was  sent  for,  returned  and  told  the  conspira- 
tors that  the  governor  was  alone. 

It  was  the  second  hour  of  the  night,  on  the  day  of  the 
Circumcision,  when  the  rebels  left  the  lodging  of  Don  Fer- 
nando, with  the  diabolical  intention  of  assailing  the  governor, 
and  taking  his  life.  They  were  eager  in  their  steps  (to  take 
vengeance  for  the  insults  they  said  they  had  received  from 
him).  Alonzo  de  Montoya  was  the  first  in  advance,  with 
Christoval  Hernandez  de  Chaves,  and,  entering  Ursua’s 
house,  they  found  him  in  his  hammock  talking  to  a little 
page  named  Lorca.  When  they  saluted  the  governor,  he 
said,  “What  seek  ye  here,  Caballeros,  at  this  hour?”  the 
reply  was  several  stabs,  which  missed  him.  He  then  rose 
from  his  hammock  to  reach  his  sword  and  buckler,  which  he 
had  at  hand,  when  the  rest  of  the  mutineers  entered,  and 
they  all  made  a murderous  onset  on  Ursua,  so  that  he  soon 
fell  dead,  without  being  able  to  say  more  than  “ Confessio, 
confessio,  miserere  mei  Deus.”  The  deed  being  done,  they 
sallied  out  of  the  hut,  and  one  of  them,  with  a loud  voice, 
shouted  “ Liberty,  liberty ! long  live  the  king,  the  tyrant  is 
dead.”  This  was  heard  by  the  lieutenant  Juan  de  Vargas, 
who  lived  hard  by,  and  he  hastily  put  on  his  escaupil,1  with 
his  sword,  shield,  and  rod  of  office,  and  went  towards  the 
governor’s  lodging,  whence  he  had  heard  the  cries,  and 
meeting  the  murderers  in  the  road,  who  were  in  search  of 
him,  they  recognized  him,  and  attacked  him,  taking  from 
him  his  sword  and  shield  and  armour,  so  as  to  serve  him  as 
they  had  the  governor.  Then,  having  torn  away  one  sleeve 
of  the  escaupil,  and  getting  away  the  other,  one  of  these 
monsters  of  Satan,  named  Martin  Perez,  infuriated  with 
his  diabolical  intention,  gave  him  so  severe  a thrust  that 
the  sword  went  through  and  through  his  body,  the  point 
wounding  his  companion  badly,  who  was  behind  the  lieu- 

1 Armour  of  quilted  cotton,  used  by  the  natives  of  South  America 
before  the  conquest. 


PEDRO  DE  URSUA. 


43 


tenant,  occupied  in  disarming  him.  The  rest,  coming  up, 
gave  Vargas  more  stabs  than  were  necessary  to  take  away 
life ; after  which  some  cried  out,  “ Liberty,  Caballeros ; long 
live  the  king!  we  will  not  be  subject  to  those  whose  only 
occupations  were  their  pleasures ! it  was  not  for  this  that  we 
left  our  homes.” 


CHAP.  XI. 

THE  CRUIZE  OF  THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


1.  The  governor  being  dead , the  rebels  endeavour  to  bring  all  the  expedi- 
tion to  their  side. — 2.  They  do  not  allow  the  soldiers  to  leave  their 
quarters  during  the  night , to  prevent  them  from  conferring  together. 
— 3.  The  murderers  divide  the  various  offices  amongst  themselves. — 
4.  They  continue  the  division  of  offices.  Sancho  Pizarro  returns. 

1.  The  lieutenant  being  dead,  the  murderers  returned  to 
the  governor’s  house,  and  then  came  the  rest  of  the  muti- 
neers, their  friends  and  allies,  who  had  been  instructed  that 
when  they  heard  a rumour  they  were  to  come  armed,  to 
assist  if  necessary.  Many  other  soldiers  came  at  the  same 
time  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  disturbance,  whom  the  rebels 
forced  into  their  own  ranks,  without  their  knowing  who  or 
how  many  composed  this  tyrannical  junta,  so  that  when 
they  came  to  know  how  and  in  what  manner  the  governor 
and  his  lieutenant  had  died,  they  were  already  incorporated 
with  the  traitors. 

As  soon  as  they  had  the  greater  portion  of  the  expedition 
under  their  command,  some  of  the  murderers,  with  their 
friends,  sallied  out  armed  in  search  of  those  who  were  want- 
ing ; some  they  took  by  force,  others  they  persuaded  by 
threats  and  promises,  and  all  were  brought  to  the  governor’s 
house,  that  they  might  be  present  at  the  burial.  A pit  was 
dug  for  both  the  murdered  men  in  Ursua’s  house,  so  that 


44 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


they  might  be  together  in  death  as  in  life ; also  that  the  ex- 
pedition might  know  who  was  now  to  be  their  general,  and 
obey  him. 

In  the  presence  of  all  (the  burial  having  taken  place) 
they  named  for  governor  Fernando  de  Guzman,  and  for  his 
maestro  del  campo,  Lope  de  Aguirre ; and  without  spend- 
ing time  in  nominating  more  officers,  they  thought  it  best  to 
sally  forth  and  kill  the  friends  of  the  late  governor  and  of 
his  lieutenant,  which  they  did  ; for  they  laid  hold  of  many, 
and  would  have  killed  more  if  Guzman  had  not  stopped 
them,  as  he  did  not  consider  it  judicious  to  commence  office 
by  causing  so  many  deaths. 

2.  The  traitors  were  fearful  that  the  friends  of  some  of  the 
dead  might  take  revenge,  seeing  that  the  general  had  not 
allowed  such  to  be  murdered  ; so  they  commanded,  under 
pain  of  death,  that  no  soldier  should  speak  in  a low  voice, 
but  that  he  should  say  what  he  had  to  say  loudly  and 
plainly,  that  what  was  spoken  might  be  understood  by 
every  one,  and  that  the  traitors  might  be  aware  of  anything 
going  on  against  them. 

Some  of  the  soldiers  were  forgetful  of  this  order,  being 
accustomed  to  speak  in  a low  tone,  which  placed  their  lives 
in  jeopardy,  and  had  it  not  been  for  some  persons  of  stand- 
ing who  interceded  with  the  traitors,  the  soldiers  would 
have  suffered.  It  was  also  ordered  that  no  one  should  be 
absent  at  night  from  his  quarters,  under  pain  of  death  ; the 
object  being  that  the  soldiers  should  devise  no  schemes 
against  the  traitors.  They  lost  no  time  (that  the  obsequies 
of  the  dead  might  not  pass  without  some  demonstration)  in 
giving  out,  with  liberality,  several  jars  of  wine  which  Ursua 
had  brought  for  his  own  drinking,  as  well  as  for  the  celebra- 
tion of  mass  (for  men  who  had  now  no  pretension  to  hear  mass, 
it  was  useless  for  this  purpose)  ; and  they  distributed  the 
wine  amongst  the  officers  and  soldiers,  that  they  might  pass 
the  night  in  confidence  and  friendship. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


45 


This  was  the  miserable  end  of  Pedro  de  Ursua,  after  his 
power  had  lasted  three  months  and  six  days  ; he  having  em- 
barked at  the  ship-yard  on  the  26th  of  September,  1560, 
and  having  been  killed  on  the  1st  of  January,  1561,  aged 
thirty-five  years.  He  was  of  middle  size,  slightly  formed, 
but  well  proportioned,  with  the  manners  of  a gentleman  ; 
light  complexion  and  beard  the  same,  courteous,  and  affable, 
fond  of  his  soldiers,  and  more  inclined  to  mercy  than  to 
justice ; thus  his  very  enemies  could  not  complain  of  his 
having  done  them  wrong  : he  was  too  confiding  and  had  but 
little  precaution,  and  his  great  goodness  was  the  main  cause 
which  brought  him  to  so  sad  an  end. 

3.  This  miserable  night  having  passed  (for  indeed  it  was  one 
for  the  dead,  as  well  as  for  their  friends  who  were  living,  and 
their  murderers  and  enemies  celebrated  it  joyously,  because 
they  had  been  successful  in  this  bloody  work  of  their  hands, 
some  believing  that  they  had  been  concerned  in  a glorious 
action,  and  a marked  service  to  the  crown  of  their  king),  the 
rebels  and  their  friends  now  asked  the  murderers  for  their 
reward,  so  that  all  might  go  on  regularly,  and  that  the  army 
might  be  kept  in  a proper  state  ; so,  confirming  the  first  ap- 
pointment, that  of  general,  in  favour  of  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man, and  that  of  maestro  del  campo  in  Lope  de  Aguirre,  they 
continued  appointing  one  another  to  the  several  offices  ; Juan 
Alonso  de  la  Bandera  was  made  captain  of  the  guard ; 
Lorenzo  Salduendo,  Christoval  Hernandez,  and  Miguel 
Serrano  de  Caceres,  captains  of  infantry ; Alonzo  de  Mon- 
toya, captain  of  horse ; Alonso  de  Villena,  alferez-general 
(standard  bearer  ?)  ; alguazil  mayor  del  campo  (high  con- 
stable), Pedro  de  Miranda,  a mulatto;  and  paymaster-general, 
Pedro  Fernandez  ; leaving  for  the  present  without  command, 
Martin  Perez  and  Juan  de  Vargas,  to  whom  they  promised 
great  things  on  the  first  occasion  that  offered,  for  their  good 
services. 

Not  to  appear  too  partial  to  themselves  and  their  friends 


46 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


in  the  distribution  of  the  various  offices,  they  made  a sea 
captain  of  Sebastian  Gomez,  a Portuguese  pilot,  and  super- 
numerary captains  of  infantry  of  the  comendador  (knight 
commander)  Juan  Gomez  de  Guevara,  and  Pedro  Alonso 
Galeas ; also  another  captain  was  nominated  to  be  in  charge 
of  the  warlike  stores,  named  Alonso  Enriquez  de  Orellana ; 
their  sea  admiral  was  one  Miguel  Robedo.  All  these  men  saw 
how  little  they  were  benefited  by  accepting  these  appoint- 
ments, still,  had  they  not  done  so,  their  lives  might  have  been 
endangered.  One  Diego  de  Belalcasar,  whom  they  named 
as  justicia  mayor  del  campo,  or  chief  judge  (an  office  he  con- 
sidered too  important,  considering  the  love  and  loyalty  he 
had  for  his  king),  said  publicly  at  the  time  they  offered  him 
the  staff  of  office,  so  that  every  one  heard  him  : Ci  This  staff 
of  office  I take  in  the  name  of  King  Philip  our  lord,  and  in 
no  other.”  This  touched  the  mutineers  severely,  so  they 
watched  him  narrowly,  and  for  this  saying  he  afterwards 
lost  his  life  ; but  at  that  time  no  one  dared  to  reply  to  him, 
in  consequence  of  the  general  discord  that  reigned  in  the 
expedition. 

Sancho  Pizarro  had  not  as  yet  returned  from  the  search 
Ursua  had  sent  him  on,  neither  did  he  know  of  the  gover- 
nor’s death,  nor  what  was  passing  in  the  camp.  The  muti- 
neers being  fearful  that,  should  he  get  only  partial  informa- 
tion, he  might  make  some  demonstration  against  them,  with 
the  people  he  had  under  his  command,  to  avenge  the  death 
of  his  friends  ; sent  spies  out  in  the  direction  he  was  to  return, 
to  prevent  any  others  from  going  out  to  advise  him  of  what 
had  occurred.  Sancho  Pizarro  came  into  the  camp  two  days 
afterwards,  without  discovering  what  had  been  going  on, 
until  he  was  within,  when  the  mutineers  informed  him  of 
what  had  happened,  persuading  him  to  believe  how  neces- 
sary it  had  been  to  act  so,  and  that  such  was  the  feeling  of 
the  whole  camp. 

Sancho  Pizarro,  who  was  a sagacious  man,  feigned  to  be 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


47 


pleased  with  the  present  state  of  things ; the  mutineers  also 
said  that  they  had  not  forgotten  him  when  they  shared  out 
the  various  offices,  for  that  they  had  kept  for  him  the  post 
of  sargento  mayor  del  campo,  which  he  accepted,  giving 
them  his  thanks.  Sancho  Pizarro  only  discovered  two  empty 
villages  whilst  he  was  away,  by  keeping  on  the  track  that 
led  from  the  camp. 


CHAP.  XII. 

1.  The  new  general,  Don  Fernando , calls  a council  to  discuss  matters 
relative  to  the  projected  discovery  of  the  new  lands  of  the  Dorado. — 

2.  He  has  a document  made  out  for  their  security , and  orders  all  to 
sign  it.  Lope  de  Aguirre  signs  it,  adding  the  word  u Traitor.  ” — 

3.  Aguirre  publicly  explains  why  he  did  so. — 4.  Juan  Alonso  de  la 
Bandera  replies,  saying  that  they  who  hilled  the  governor  were  not 
traitors. 

1.  The  various  offices  had  been  distributed,  when  Don 
Fernando,  by  virtue  of  his  office,  called  a council  of  the 
officers,  soldiers,  and  principal  people  of  the  camp  to  confer 
as  to  how  they  were  to  proceed  in  the  discovery  of  the  pre- 
tended Dorado  they  were  in  search  of,  so  as  to  have  their 
opinions  signed  with  their  names,  and  that  they  might  take 
that  course  which  seemed  most  convenient  to  all.  He  signed 
his  name  first  as  the  commander  of  the  expedition,  and  gave 
his  opinion  as  follows:  that  they  ought  to  continue  the  search 
for  the  lands  concerning  which  Ursua  had  information,  and 
that,  should  they  he  as  rich  as  fame  had  blazoned,  the  king 
not  only  would  consider  the  discovery  a great  service,  but 
would  pardon  them  the  death  of  Ursua  and  Vargas  ; still  it 
would  be  well,  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty,  that  he  and  all 
the  rest  should  draw  up  a document  stating  why  the  governor 
Ursua  had  been  deprived  of  life,  inasmuch  as  he  had  been 


48 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


most  negligent  and  unmindful  in  his  search  after  the  new 
lands,  that  he  had  not  taken  the  necessary  steps,  and  that  he 
had  no  intention  to  settle  even  if  he  should  find  them ; that 
he  was  intolerant  and  severe  to  the  soldiers,  and  that  to  pre- 
serve the  men  in  the  service  of  the  king,  as  well  as  to  disco- 
ver the  unknown  lands,  his  death  was  a necessary  act ; for 
had  he  been  allowed  to  govern  them  much  longer,  without 
doubt  there  would  have  been  a general  mutiny ; that  the 
brigantines  would  have  been  violently  taken  away  from  him, 
and  that  the  people  would  have  returned  to  Christian  lands 
(Peru),  leaving  him  on  the  river,  without  discovering  the 
vast  provinces  which  were  before  them. 

2.  To  these  he  added  other  frivolous  ideas,  which  he  said 
were  well  founded.  Alonso  de  Montoya  and  Juan  de  la 
Bandera  agreed  with  him ; but  the  Biscayan,  Lope  de 
Aguirre,  was  opposed  to  the  new  governor’s  views,  because 
he  (Aguirre)  from  the  commencement  of  the  expedition 
wished  to  return  to  Peru,  without  occupying  himself  in  the 
discovery  of  new  lands,  that  he  might  excite  a rebellion  in 
that  kingdom,  in  which  plan  he  had  many  adherents. 

Aguirre  and  others  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  contradict 
Don  Fernando  by  words,  but  their  silence  showed  what 
their  feelings  were.  This  silence  was  understood  by  many, 
and  the  rest  said  nothing  ; so,  as  no  one  spoke  or  gave  any 
opinion,  the  council  was  dissolved. 

Don  Fernando  determined,  however,  with  some  of  his 
friends,  that  a document  should  be  drawn  up  against  Ursua. 
This  was  done,  and,  that  it  might  carry  weight,  Don  Fer- 
nando ordered  that  it  should  be  signed  by  the  whole  camp, 
for  he  said  that  it  was  for  their  mutual  good.  The  men  being 
present,  the  governor  signed  it  first,  and  it  was  then  Lope  de 
Aguirre’s  turn  to  sign,  as  maestro  del  campo  ; but  he  with- 
drew the  mask,  and  signed  “ Lope  de  Aguirre,  the  traitor.” 
There  was  a general  murmur  at  seeing  this,  particularly 
from  those  who  were  not  so  corrupted  ; they  said  that  it  was 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


49 


an  insult  to  his  person  and  office  thus  to  sign  himself ; but 
Lope  de  Aguirre  observing  this,  insolent  man  as  he  was, 
and  that  he  was  but  little  esteemed  for  having  signed  him- 
self as  he  had  done,  wished  to  give  an  explanation,  and 
spoke  thus : 

3.  “ Caballeros,  what  madness  and  gross  ignorance  is  this 
into  which  some  of  us  have  fallen,  which,  certes,  looks  more 
like  a pastime  than  an  affair  of  such  importance.  You  have 
killed  the  king’s  governor,  one  who  represented  his  royal 
person,  one  who  was  clothed  with  royal  powers  ; and  do 
you  pretend  that  with  documents  concocted  by  ourselves, 
we  shall  be  held  blameless  ? think  you  that  the  king  and  the 
judges  will  not  understand  how  such  papers  were  got  up  ? 
This  is  madness ; and  well  is  it  known  to  all,  that  if  those 
who  sign  it  should  be  asked  questions  against  themselves, 
it  will  go  against  them,  if  they  have  said  so  much  in  their 
own  favour.  Yes,  we  have  all  killed  the  governor,  and 
the  whole  of  us  have  rejoiced  at  the  act ; and  if  not,  let 
each  man  lay  his  hand  upon  his  heart,  and  say  what  he 
thinks.  We  have  all  been  traitors,  we  have  all  been  a party 
to  this  mutiny,  and  have  agreed  that  the  country  (in  search 
of  which  we  are)  shall  be  sought  for,  found,  and  settled. 
Now  should  it  be  ten  times  richer  than  Piru,  and  more  popu- 
lous than  New  Spain  (Mexico),  and  should  the  king  draw 
more  profit  from  it  than  from  all  the  Indies  together,  yet  as 
soon  as  the  first  bachiller  or  letradillo1  comes  with  powers 
from  his  majesty  to  take  up  his  residence  amongst  us,  and 
to  take  note  of  what  has  been  done  by  us,  I tell  you  it  will 
cost  us  all  our  heads  : thus  our  exertions  and  services  will 
have  been  in  vain,  and  fruitless,  for  ourselves  and  successors. 
My  opinion  is  (and  I hold  it  to  be  more  to  the  point  than 
what  you  have  conceived),  that  we  should  abandon  these  in- 
tentions of  searching  for  these  new  lands  ; for  if  we  discover 

1 Bachiller  in  this  case  is  one  who  has  obtained  the  first  degree  in  the 
sciences  and  liberal  arts.  Letradillo  is  a pettifogger. 

H 


50 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


them  and  people  them,  our  lives  will  be  sacrificed.  Let  us 
therefore  anticipate  the  evil  time,  and  let  us  settle  ourselves 
well  in  a good  land  known  to  you  all,  which  is  Piru.  There 
all  are  friendly  to  us,  and,  on  hearing  that  we  are  approach- 
ing, they  will  come  out  and  meet  us.  They,  having  the  same 
views  as  ourselves,  will  open  their  arms,  and  will  assist  us 
with  their  lives.  This  is  (I  repeat)  what  we  ought  to  do, 
and  this  is  the  reason  why  I signed  myself  e traitor.5  55 

In  confirmation  of  Aguirre’s  opinion,  Alonzo  de  Villena 
started  up  (the  Alferez  general,  and  one  of  those  who 
went  to  kill  the  governor)  and,  said  “ What  the  Senor  Lope 
de  Aguirre,  maestro  del  campo,  has  spoken,  appears  to  me 
to  be  the  best  to  be  done,  and  must  suit  all,  and  I confirm  it 
with  my  vote  ; and  I believe  that  his  reasons  are  good,  and 
any  one  who  counsels  the  Serior  general  otherwise,  is  no 
friend  of  his,  but  wishes  his  ruin  and  that  of  the  expedition, 
and  is  his  enemy.” 

4.  Juan  Alonso  de  la  Bandera,  seeing  that  no  one  moved 
to  reply  and  contradict  the  speciousness  of  Lope  de  Aguirre, 
or  to  second  the  governor,  said  that  the  death  of  Ursua  was 
no  treason,  neither  had  any  crime  been  committed,  and  that 
what  had  been  done  was  a necessary  act,  because  Ursua  had 
other  intentions  than  those  which  were  suited  to  the  king’s 
service,  who  had  commanded  that  Ursua  should  discover 
and  settle  the  lands  of  the  Dorado  ; and  thus  his  majesty  was 
better  served  by  the  death  of  the  governor,  than  that  through 
him  so  many  people  should  perish  in  an  expedition,  wherein 
so  much  money  had  been  spent ; that  the  king  would  hold 
it  as  good  service  that  the  lands  should  be  discovered  and 
peopled,  and  that  he  would  overlook  what  had  been  done, 
and  would  even  reward  them  with  his  royal  hand : con- 
cluding, “ and  he  who  says  that  I am  a traitor  in  this  mat- 
ter, I tell  him  that  he  lies,  and  I will  make  good  my  words, 
and  I now  dare  him  to  mortal  combat.” 

These  words  so  roused  Aguirre  and  some  of  his  friends, 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


51 


that  they  wished  to  reply  in  the  same  strain,  and  even  to 
resort  at  once  to  arms  ; as  they  would  have  done,  had  not 
the  general  and  his  captains  put  themselves  between  the 
angry  parties  ; but  Juan  Alonso,  wishing  to  satisfy  many 
that  what  he  had  said  was  not  for  fear  that  the  king  would 
cut  his  head  off,  again  spoke,  saying,  e<  Do  as  you  please ; 
and  that  you  may  not  think  that  what  I have  said  is  from 
any  fear  that  I have  of  death  or  to  save  my  life,  I will  act 
like  the  rest,  and  let  it  be  understood  that  I have  as  good 
a neck  as  any  one  here/5  With  this  the  disturbance  ceased 
for  a time,  and  the  council  was  dissolved ; but  Aguirre  and 
his  friends  henceforward  incited  all  those  they  possibly 
could  to  side  with  them  in  going  up  the  river  to  Piru,  of 
which  way  of  thinking  there  were  many. 


CHAP.  XIII. 

] . They  leave  the  village  (Machiparo)  where  they  had  killed  Ursua,  and 
going  down  the  river,  arrive  at  another  village , where  they  com- 
mence building  brigantines. — 2.  They  suffer  so  much  from  hunger 
in  this  village,  that  they  are  obliged  to  eat  horses  and  dogs. — 
3.  Aguirre  kills  Captain  del  Arze,  because  he  was  a friend  of  Ursua’ s, 
seizes  Diego  de  Belcazar  for  the  same  cause , and  has  two  others 
strangled. — 4.  Don  Fernando  takes  away  the  office  of  maestro  del 
campo  from  Lope  de  Aguirre,  and  gives  it  to  Juan  Alonzo  de  la 
Bandera  his  lieutenant-general. 

1.  Five  days  after  the  death  of  Ursua,  the  expedition  pro- 
ceeded down  the  river,  the  mutineers  disagreeing,  some 
wanting  to  go  back  to  Piru,  and  others  to  go  in  search  of  the 
new  lands.  They  arrived,  on  the  same  day  that  they  left 
Machiparo  (Ursua’s  sepulchre)  at  another  village  on  the  cliffs 
of  the  river,  and  so  totally  abandoned,  that  they  did  not 
even  find  earthen  vessels  to  cook  their  food  in. 


52 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


They  stopped  here  because  the  greater  number  desired  it. 
Lope  de  Aguirre,  and  those  of  his  opinion,  were  for  return- 
ing to  Piru,  not  by  the  river,  but  by  sea,1  and  as  it  appeared 
to  them  that  this  locality  was  most  suitable  for  the  cutting  of 
timber  to  build  large  vessels,  so  that  they  might  go  out  to  sea, 
they  bored  holes  in  one  of  the  flat-bottomed  boats,  in  which 
the  horses  came,  to  sink  them  as  they  had  done  to  others  at 
the  village  they  had  left ; for  they  found  themselves  obliged 
to  build  brigantines  and  other  craft  of  a larger  sort  than  they 
had  brought  with  them  to  this  spot. 

We  shall  now  call  Aguirre’s  party  by  the  name  of  Mara- 
nones,  as  they  generally  called  themselves.  Don  Fernando, 
finding  himself  with  canoes  only,  and  these  not  fit  for  the 
transport  of  horses  nor  for  the  quantity  of  cargo  he  had, 
ordered  large  brigantines  to  be  built,  and  seeing  that  he  had 
tools,  pitch,  and  cordage,  which  Ursua  had  brought  for  such 
purposes,  as  well  as  from  four  to  six  ship-carpenters  and 
twenty  negros  to  assist ; he  added  some  soldiers  to  help  in 
the  building  of  the  vessels,  in  which  labour  they  spent  three 
months,  during  which  time  several  occurrences  took  place, 
as  we  shall  explain. 

2.  The  first,  and  not  the  least  important,  was  a fearful 
famine,  from  which  none  escaped.  Their  principal  susten- 
ance was  the  wild  yuca,  from  which  they  procured  cassaba. 
They  themselves  had  to  go  to  the  other  side  of  the  river  to 
collect  it,  which  was  a league  broad ; and  they  had  to  pre- 
pare the  cassaba  from  which  they  made  the  bread,  for  nearly 
all  the  Indians,  male  and  female,  who  had  come  with  them 
from  Piru,  were  dead.  Neither  was  there  much  fish  found 
in  this  portion  of  the  river  (all  things  seemed  conspiring  to 
punish  them  for  their  sins),  for  with  the  greatest  trouble 
they  only  took  a few ; so  they  had  to  support  themselves 

1 Namely,  to  proceed  down  the  river  to  its  mouth  in  the  Atlantic, 
then  coast  along  Terra  Firma  to  the  Isthmus  of  Darien,  thence  to  Peru 
by  the  Pacific. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


53 


with  a little  cassaba  bread  and  wild  strawberries,  which  were 
in  reasonable  abundance  ; caymitos,1  dates,  guayavas,2  and 
some  other  fruits,  sustenance  more  suited  for  monkeys  than 
for  men.  The  Aguirres,  in  consequence  of  this  visitation  of 
famine  (their  wish  daily  increasing  to  go  back  to  Piru), 
began  to  eat  their  horses  and  dogs.  This  was  not  unpleasing 
to  Aguirre,  for  in  this  case  the  others  would  find  it  impos- 
sible, being  without  horses  and  dogs,  to  commence  their 
conquests  by  land.  They  also  consumed  all  their  poultry, 
without  leaving  any  for  the  new  settlements  it  was  pre- 
tended they  were  to  form,  in  the  provinces  they  were  to  dis- 
cover. 

3.  Those  of  Aguirre’s  opinions  (a  few  days  after  arriving 
at  this  village)  sought  how  to  obtain  the  friendship  of  the 
greater  portion  of  the  soldiers ; commencing  with  the  first 
step,  namely,  that  of  liberty  of  conscience  (the  touchstone  of 
the  damned),  promising  them  abundance  of  riches,  lands, 
and  appointments  in  that  wonderful  country  Piru,  which 
they  firmly  believed  they  would  conquer  with  ease.  By  such 
means  Aguirre  increased  his  followers,  so  that  he  was  in  a 
better  position  to  take  measures  to  obtain  the  end  he  de- 
sired ; and  his  nature  being  inclined  to  the  shedding  of 
human  blood,  he  looked  around  to  see  whom  he  should 
begin  with,  in  the  exercise  of  his  office.  He  commenced 
with  Garcia  del  Arze,  who  was  a great  friend  of  Ursua’s,  and 
of  long  standing.  He  caused  him  to  be  arrested,  and  in- 
formed the  General  how  important  it  was  for  the  safety  of 
his  person,  and  that  of  the  camp,  that  Arze  should  not  be 
in  it;  so  he  was  strangled  without  more  ado.  In  order 
that  this  small  affair  (as  it  appeared  to  Aguirre)  might  not 
horrify  the  army,  he  determined  to  kill  Diego  de  Balcasar 
(of  whom  we  have  said  that  when  they  made  him  justicia 
mayor  del  campo,  and  he  took  the  staff  of  office,  he  declared 

1 Chrysophyllum  carimito. — Seeman. 

2 Probably  the  Inga  spectabilis. — Seeman. 


54 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


that  he  did  it  in  the  name  of  the  king)  for  it  was  manifest  to 
Aguirre  that  a man  who  had  spoken  in  such  a manner  was 
to  be  feared,  seeing  that  he  might  interfere  with  the  more 
mutinous  in  the  camp.  Having  had  his  staff  of  office  taken 
from  him,  Aguirre  went  one  night,  with  some  companions, 
to  his  lodgings,  and  found  him  in  bed.  He  was  dragged 
out,  with  the  intention  of  taking  him  to  another  place  to 
strangle  him  ; but  Balcasar,  understanding  this,  escaped 
from  them,  crying  out : ff  Long  live  the  king,  long  live  the 
king !”  with  a view  to  alarm  and  obstruct  his  pursuers,  and 
also  to  incite  others  to  come  out  and  protect  him.  However, 
seeing  that  his  shouts  did  neither  one  thing  nor  the  other,  he 
threw  himself  into  the  river,  and  although  he  hurt  himself 
badly,  he  escaped,  owing  to  the  obscurity  of  the  night.  The 
governor  was  made  aware  of  what  had  happened,  and  in  the 
morning  sent  men  to  search  for  Balcasar,  and  assure  him  of 
his  life.  He  consented  to  return,  and  did  not  die  this  time. 

Now  the  powerful  hand  of  Heaven  (although  it  consents 
to  the  commission  of  evil,  by  its  secret  judgments,  does  not 
leave  it  without  a punishment,  which  is  always  less  than  its 
due),  began  to  show  its  divine  justice  against  the  principal 
mutineers  and  assassins  of  Ursua,  causing  some  to  be  the 
executioners  of  others,  as  we  shall  see,  for  in  these  days  a 
rumour  ran  through  the  camp,  without  it  being  known  who 
had  originated  it  (because  men  so  impious  as  they  were,  are  not 
particular  in  crediting  rumours  and  saddling  them  on  any 
one  they  please),  that  Pedro  Miranda  Mulatto,  as  we  have  said, 
who  was  one  of  the  principal  mutineers  and  alguazil  mayor 
of  the  camp,  and  Pedro  Hernandez,  the  paymaster-general, 
both  of  whom  were  present  at  the  death  of  Ursua,  meditated 
the  death  of  the  General  Don  Fernando,  as  well  as  of  certain 
captains.  When  this  came  to  the  ears  of  Aguirre,  without 
ascertaining  if  there  was  any  truth  in  the  report  (for  bad 
men  do  not  scruple  to  act  wickedly),  and  palliating  his  acts 
under  the  shadow  of  apparent  zeal  for  the  safety  of  the  life 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


55 


of  the  General  and  his  friends,  he  arrested  both  without  fur- 
ther notice,  put  them  into  prison  and  strangled  them,  giving 
their  posts  to  two  of  the  mutineers  ; that  of  alguazil  to  one 
Juan  Lopez  Cerrato,  and  that  of  paymaster  to  Juan  Lopez 
de  Ayala.  This  gave  umbrage  to  the  rest,  and  then  followed 
discords,  dissensions,  and  deaths,  because  the  devil  had  pre- 
pared their  hearts,  ready  for  his  work. 

4.  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman’s  power  appeared  in  the 
ascendant,  and  he  was  principally  occupied  in  rewarding  his 
friends,  being  pleased  that  they  should  thrive  through  his 
bounty  and  appointments  ; for  he  felt  that  they  would  be 
grateful  to  him. 

His  first  act  was  in  favour  of  Juan  Alonso  de  la  Bandera, 
from  whom  the  General  had  received  good  service  on  many 
occasions.  He  named  him  his  lieutenant-general,  and  he, 
having  accepted  the  office,  commenced  the  exercise  of  its 
functions  by  opposing  the  doings  of  the  maestro  del  campo 
Aguirre ; they  had  opposed  each  other  since  the  meeting  of 
the  council,  when  Lope  de  Aguirre,  in  the  document  made 
out  by  Don  Fernando,  signed  himself,  “Aguirre  the  traitor.” 
Now  their  ill  will  began  to  show  itself  in  earnest,  and  it  was 
increased  since  Bandera  had  become  lieutenant-general,  be- 
cause he  attended  well  to  the  duties  of  his  office,  which  was 
not  agreeable  to  Aguirre.  At  last  opinions  were  expressed 
by  the  soldiers  and  captains  as  to  which  of  the  two  officers 
was  the  superior,  and  which  of  the  two  was  to  be  obeyed  in 
preference  to  the  other.  The  friends  of  Aguirre  defended 
the  post  of  maestro  del  campo,  saying  that  it  was  the  supe- 
rior. Those  of  Juan  Alonso  were  of  a contrary  opinion ; and 
soon  the  two  parties  withdrew  the  mask,  and  treated  openly 
of  their  old  enmities,  which  until  then  had  been  kept  down. 

The  General  sought  to  stop  these  dissensions,  for  he  had 
not  forgotten  what  he  owed  to  Bandera,  and  he  knew  him 
to  be  a better  friend  than  Aguirre.  He  therefore  took 
from  Aguirre  his  post  of  maestro  del  campo,  and  gave  it  to 


56 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Bandera,  so  that  he  now  held  the  two  offices.  This  tended 
to  increase  the  flame  of  discord,  and  manifold  were  the 
difficulties  that  followed ; not  that  the  governor  put  Aguirre 
quite  out  of  favour,  for  the  latter  could  make  himself 
popular  or  rebellious ; but  he  made  him  captain  of  horse, 
and  Lorenzo  de  Salduendo  captain  of  the  guard,  which 
post  was  previously  held  by  Bandera. 


CHAP.  XIV. 

1.  Bon  Fernando  comes  to  an  understanding  with  Lope  de  Aguirre , and 
promises  to  restore  him  to  his  post  of  maestro  del  campo. — 2.  The 
governor  and  Aguirre  become  friends , the  enmity  of  the  latter  in- 
creases against  Bandera. — 3.  Aguirre  calumniates  Bandera  before 
the  governor , saying  that  he  wished  to  kill  the  governor , and  rebel. — 
4.  Aguirre  kills  Bandera , and  one  Christoval  Hernandez , at  the 
governor's  house. 

1 . Lope  de  Aguirre  did  not  think  that  this  was  the  proper 
time  to  show  resentment  for  the  loss  of  his  office,  but  left  it 
to  the  future,  contenting  himself  with  his  captaincy  of  horse. 
At  this  time  some  of  the  governor’s  friends  told  him  that 
it  was  not  to  his  interest  to  have  Aguirre  so  much  by  his 
side,  for  that  they  knew  him  of  old  to  be  a restless  and 
revengeful  fellow,  and  that  doubtless  he  was  storing  up  such 
feelings  for  an  occasion  when  least  expected.  They  firmly 
believed  that,  for  the  security  of  Don  Fernando’s  person,  the 
best  thing  to  do  was  to  kill  Aguirre  ; and,  if  the  gover- 
nor did  not  wish  to  do  it,  they  offered  to  do  the  deed, 
with  his  permission.  But  the  good  feeling  of  the  General 
(which,  at  times,  was  more  than  requisite  for  the  post  he 
held)  did  not  allow  him  to  kill  Aguirre,  or  consent  to  his 
death,  although  the  mutineer  had  deserved  such  an  end,  on 
too  many  occasions.  The  governor  tried  to  appease  the 
anger  which  Aguirre  might  feel  against  him,  for  his  removal 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


57 


from  the  post  of  maestro  del  campo,  by  making  him  great 
promises,  saying,  that  he  pledged  him  his  faith  and  word 
that  he  should  have  his  old  command  before  they  entered 
Piru,  and  that  he  would  marry  a brother  of  his  (who  had  re- 
mained there,  named  Martin  de  Guzman)  with  his  mestiza 
daughter,  who  was  with  her  father,  Lope  de  Aguirre. 

Aguirre  acted  the  part  of  a vile  scoundrel,  and  with 
smiles  on  his  false  face,  accepted  the  honour  of  the  prof- 
fered marriage,  and  the  promises  of  restoration  to  his  old 
office  ; appearing  to  consider  what  the  governor  had  offered 
to  be  far  above  his  deserts. 

8.  The  General  shortly  afterwards  paid  a visit  to  the 
daughter  of  Lope  de  Aguirre,  to  compliment  her  on  the 
projected  marriage  and  relationship,  taking  with  him,  as  a 
present,  a robe  of  rich  silk,  which  had  belonged  to  Pedro 
de  Ursua.  He  gave  her  the  title  of  Doha,  which  she  had 
not  received  previously,  and  henceforth  treated  her  as  his 
sister-in-law.  Now  as  Aguirre  was  so  wicked  a man,  and, 
on  that  account,  had  so  many  friends  of  the  same  stamp, 
who  went  about  murmuring  that  he  had  been  displaced,  and 
who  might  have  excited  rebellion,  this  projected  marriage 
was  intended  to  appease  them. 

Dissembling  for  awhile,  Lope  de  Aguirre  again  treated 
Don  Pernando  with  his  former  friendship,  but  his  ill-will 
towards  Bandera,  fanned  by  envy,  increased  hourly.  The 
sight  of  his  rival  placed  above  him,  caused  Aguirre  to 
revolve  in  his  astute  mind,  how  Bandera  was  to  be  hurled 
from  his  high  position.  This  state  of  things  was  not  hidden 
from  Bandera,  and  he  was  informed  of  it  by  his  friends, 
who  advised,  for  his  own  safety,  that  Aguirre  should  be 
killed.  With  this  intent  they  often  went  in  search  of  him, 
but  without  effect,  for  Aguirre  was  always  well  on  his  guard, 
and  never  alone.  He  was  armed  day  and  night ; and  even 
when  asleep,  neither  he,  nor  his  partizans,  were  without 
their  arms. 


i 


58 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


The  two  offices  held  by  Juan  Alonso  de  la  Bandera  had 
produced  in  him  a haughty  and  proud  demeanour,  which, 
independently  of  causing  many  of  his  old  friends  to  separate 
from  him,  had  rendered  him  obnoxious  to  many  others, 
particularly  to  Lorenzo  de  Salduendo,  the  captain  of  the 
guard,  because  both  pretended  to  the  favour  of  Doha  Inez. 
Salduendo  was  confederated  with  Aguirre,  and  rested  not 
in  devising  the  means  to  get  Bandera  removed  from  his 
office,  and  even  to  take  away  his  life. 

No  better  plan  suggested  itself,  than  to  have  it  bruited  in 
the  camp  that  Bandera,  not  contented  with  the  two  offices 
he  held,  was  ambitious  to  be  the  general  of  the  expedition, 
and  that  it  was  his  intention  to  kill  Don  Fernando  and 
succeed  him.  This  rumour  having  been  made  public  (the 
author  of  it  was  believed  to  be  Aguirre),  the  traitor  went  with 
some  of  his  friends  to  Don  Fernando,  reporting  to  him  what 
had  been  said,  namely,  that  Bandera  sought  to  kill  him,  and 
take  his  place.  However,  Don  Fernando  was  incredulous, 
because  he  knew  that  Aguirre  was  a sworn  foe  to  Juan 
Alonso,  and  he  said  that  the  report  had  more  of  enmity  than 
truth  in  it,  and  that  it  was  a mere  suspicion  thrown  out 
by  an  unknown  author. 

Evil  designs  never  want  sponsors  to  foment  them,  as 
occurred  in  this  case  ; for  Salduendo  was  present  at  this 
interview,  and,  urged  on  by  his  love  for  Doha  Ines,  he 
certified  to  Don  Fernando  that  what  Aguirre  had  said  was 
true,  for  that  he  had  heard  it  publicly  asserted  as  a fixed 
project,  and  he  affirmed  that  it  was  so,  by  a thousand  oaths. 
Don  Fernando  then  began  to  give  some  credit  to  Aguirre, 
and  also  to  the  report  that  Bandera  had  promised  to  one 
Christoval  Hernandez  the  post  of  maestro  del  campo,  when 
he  (Bandera)  became  governor. 

4.  Without  further  examination  into  the  truth  of  this 
report,  the  governor  consulted  with  Aguirre  how  Hernan- 
dez and  Juan  Alonso  should  be  killed,  believing  that  this  was 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


59 


the  best  way  to  get  rid  of  the  fears  which  soon  took  posses- 
sion of  him  (legitimate  offspring  of  treason),  and  that  if  he 
did  not  kill  them  they  would  kill  him.  It  was  not  easy  to 
find  the  time  and  occasion  for  the  deed,  owing  to  the  precau- 
tions taken  by  Juan  Alonso,  who  was  always  accompanied 
by  numerous  friends,  although  the  most  wary  plans  were 
laid  to  consummate  this  wickedness. 

At  last  Don  Fernando  threw  the  victims  somewhat  off 
their  guard,  by  inviting  them  to  play  at  cards  at  his  lodg- 
ing ; designing  that,  while  Juan  Alonso  and  Hernandez 
were  at  play,  Lope  de  Aguirre  and  his  partizans  should 
come  in  and  kill  both.  As  it  was  planned,  so  was  it  exe- 
cuted, and,  during  the  height  of  play,  Don  Fernando  sent 
for  Aguirre,  who  came  instantly  with  his  armed  followers, 
and,  approaching  the  players  on  one  side,  whilst  others, 
until  then  hidden  by  Don  Fernando,  appeared  with  mus- 
kets, lances,  and  daggers  on  the  other,  gave  a cruel  death 
to  Bandera  and  Hernandez,  as  they  had  done  to  Ursua. 

This  crime  having  been  committed,  Aguirre  at  once  asked 
to  be  paid  for  his  services,  and  was  again  made  maestro  del 
campo,  and  replaced  in  all  his  previous  honours  : and  as  two 
posts  were  vacant  by  the  death  of  the  two  victims,  one  of 
whom  was  captain  of  infantry  and  lieutenant-general,  Guzman 
gave  that  post  to  one  Gonzalo  Guiral  de  Fuentes,  his  great 
friend,  and  the  other  to  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends. 
Thus  he  considered  that  his  person  and  camp  would  now  be 
in  security. 


60 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


CHAP.  XV. 

1.  The  soldiers  irritate  the  Indians , who  bring  provisions  for  them , when 
some  Spaniards  are  hilled. — 2.  Owing  to  these  proceedings  the  Span- 
iards suffer  great  privations,  on  account  of  the  fear  the  Indians  have 
of  coming  near  them. — 3.  Aguirre  succeeds  in  gaining  the  confidence 
of  Don  Fernnndo,  for  his  own  particular  ends. — 4.  Don  Fernando 
plans  how  to  discover  the  real  sentiments  of  the  soldiers,  and  their 
devotion  to  him  ; and  how  he  succeeds. 

1.  The  Indians  of  the  vicinity  were  not  well  affected 
towards  the  Spaniards,  though  at  times  they  brought  some 
provisions  to  the  camp,  in  exchange  for  beads  and  bells. 
The  Indians  would  have  continued  to  do  this,  if  the  soldiers 
had  treated  them  properly,  but  there  was  no  one  to  keep 
the  soldiers  within  bounds,  and  they  treated  the  Indians 
badly,  which  made  them  refrain  from  coming  with  provi- 
sions to  the  camp,  and  of  this  the  stomachs  of  the  Spaniards 
soon  began  to  bear  painful  wdtness. 

One  day  a number  of  Indians  came  with  provisions,  wish- 
ing to  have  things  from  the  Spaniards  in  exchange;  when 
a party  of  the  most  murderous  of  the  soldiers  enticed  them 
out  of  their  canoes,  made  them  prisoners,  shut  them  up  in  a 
hut,  and  took  possession  of  their  canoes.  This  was  seen  by 
other  Indians,  who  had  remained  on  the  river  in  their 
canoes,  and  who  fled,  and  were  never  more  seen,  for  the 
fear  they  had  of  the  Spaniards.  Those  who  had  been  im- 
prisoned, although  they  feared  the  white  men,  were  also  ex- 
asperated against  them  when  they  returned  to  their  homes, 
having  escaped  after  a few  days  confinement.  Not  long 
afterwards  the  soldiers  suffered  severely  for  what  they  had 
done ; for  trusting  to  the  terms  of  friendship  they  were  on 
with  the  Indians  (not  believing  that  the  natives  were  so 
incensed  against  them),  four  or  six  Spaniards  went  into  the 
interior,  without  taking  any  precaution  for  their  safety,  to 
collect  the  yuca  plant,  to  make  cassava  bread,  when  a large 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


61 


number  of  Indians,  who  had  been  lying  in  wait  for  them, 
rushed  out  furiously  on  their  foes,  and,  before  they  could 
collect  themselves,  and  use  their  arms,  they  were  all  killed. 
Their  names  were  Sebastian  Gomez,  a sea  captain,  one 
Molina,  Villarial,  Pedro  Diaz,  Mendoza,  and  one  Anton 
Rodriguez. 

2.  This  was  a salutary  lesson  for  the  rest  of  the  soldiers, 
so  that  they  did  not  make  more  excursions,  nor  enter  the 
Indian  country  ; and  as  no  natives  came  to  the  camp,  the 
want  of  food  was  most  severely  felt.  It  was  thought  that  the 
Indians,  after  this  success,  would  be  emboldened  and  come 
by  night  and  steal  away  the  canoes,  which  were  secured  to 
the  cliff,  for  they  were  of  the  greatest  use  to  them,  to  go  up 
or  down  the  river  in  quest  of  food.  But  it  was  suspected 
that  Lope  de  Aguirre,  actuated  by  his  evil  disposition,  caused 
some  of  the  canoes  to  be  secured  to  the  shore  at  night,  and 
allowed  others  purposely  to  float  away  down  the  river,  so 
that  the  discontented  soldiers  might  not  have  the  oppor- 
tunity of  taking  them,  and  deserting.  This  suspicion  against 
Aguirre  was  increased,  when  it  was  given  out  that  the  In- 
dians had  taken  them.  However  it  might  really  have  been, 
there  was  the  fact,  that  out  of  more  than  one  hundred  and 
fifty  canoes,  scarcely  twenty  remained,  and  these  were  the 
worst  and  smallest. 

3.  Aguirre,  finding  himself  with  a smaller  number  of 
enemies,  since  the  death  of  Juan  Alonso  de  la  Bandera  and 
Christoval  Hernandez,  and  also  being  reinstated  in  his  old 
office  (which  made  him  the  second  person  in  the  camp,  and 
about  to  be  related  to  the  governor  by  the  projected  mar- 
riage of  his  daughter),  was  most  anxious  to  have  it  believed 
on  all  occasions,  that  a sincere  friendship  existed  between 
Don  Fernando  and  himself ; wishing  by  this  means  to  have 
it  known  in  the  camp,  that,  in  consequence  of  his  influence, 
what  he  ordered  must  be  done.  Thus  the  number  of  his 
adherents  increased.  Don  Fernando  thought  that  Aguirre 


62 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


was  much  attached  to  him,  being  of  too  easy  a nature,  and 
believing  all  he  heard  from  the  maestro  del  campo,  who  had 
the  art  to  persuade  him  that  all  he  did  was  for  the  success  of 
the  expedition.  But  it  is  one  of  the  greatest  errors  that  can 
happen,  in  the  government  of  a people,  that  they  should 
know  the  real  character  of  their  governor,  for  in  that  case 
they  will  generally  take  advantage  of  his  weakness,  as  hap- 
pens to  birds,  animals,  and  fish,  for  which  men  lay  snares 
according  to  their  natural  habits,  which  are  known,  and 
taken  advantage  of. 

The  cautious  Aguirre,  knowing  how  to  mould  the  plastic 
nature  of  Don  Fernando,  and  that  he  was  fond  of  show  and 
ceremony,  approached  him  one  day  by  his  weak  side,  saying 
that  it  was  requisite,  in  order  that  he  might  know  the  peo- 
ple and  soldiers  he  had  with  him,  and  their  intentions  as  to 
continuing  in  the  expedition,  that  he  should  call  them  toge- 
ther, try  them,  and  ask  them  if  they  were  satisfied  that  he 
should  be  their  general ; and  if  not,  to  elect  whom  they 
pleased ; and  to  call  upon  those,  who  did  not  wish  to  follow 
the  war  into  Peru,  to  declare  themselves,  and  thus  he  would 
see  who  were  devoted  to  him,  and  who  were  not. 

4.  As  Aguirre  had  suggested,  so  did  the  general  act,  and, 
calling  together  all  the  people  one  day,  in  the  open  space  in 
front  of  his  lodging,  he  sallied  out  with  a partisan  (a  kind  of 
pike  or  halberd),  accompanied  by  his  friends,  and  Lope  de 
Aguirre  with  his,  and  spoke  thus 

“ Cavaliers  and  noble  soldiers,  for  days  past  I have  de- 
sired to  speak  with  you,  the  more  particularly  as  I have 
heard  that  some  of  you  are  not  satisfied,  in  consequence  of 
not  having  taken  part  in  my  election  as  general.  My  inten- 
tion has  never  been  to  offend  those  who  belong  to  this 
expedition,  and  if  I accepted  the  office  of  general,  it  was 
because  I believed  I was  administering  to  the  general  good. 
I was  also  warmly  solicited  by  many,  and  rather  against  my 
own  wishes ; for  you  well  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  act  so 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


63 


as  to  content  all,  and  the  great  care  necessary  in  all  things, 
particularly  in  warlike  affairs;  thus  it  is  well  that  the  general, 
who  has  to  govern  a camp,  such  as  this,  wherein  there  are 
so  many  cavaliers  and  good  soldiers,  should  be  elected  by 
general  consent,  so  that  all  may  work  willingly  in  war,  being 
commanded  by  one  whom  they  have  chosen.  It  is  for  this 
that  I have  summoned  you,  for  it  is  my  desire  that  you 
should  look  around  this  camp,  and  see  if  you  cannot  find 
any  one  more  eligible  than  myself,  who,  by  reason  of  his 
greater  sagacity  and  prudence,  might  take  upon  himself  this 
office  of  general.  I wish  you  to  look  well  around,  and  to  elect 
whom  you  please.  You  have  entire  liberty  to  do  this,  and 
that  you  may  have  greater  freedom  of  action,  I promise  to 
give  up  and  resign  my  office  to  any  one  you  may  elect,  and 
I will  obey  him  cheerfully,  as  a soldier  in  the  ranks. 
In  token  of  this  resignation  and  renunciation,  I place  this 
partisan  upright  in  the  ground,  as  if  it  were  the  staff  of 
justice.”  So  he  left  the  partisan  standing  in  the  ground, 
and,  uncovering  his  head,  he  retired  to  those  who  had  ac- 
companied him,  adding,  “ The  same  renunciation  of  their 
posts  is  made  by  these  officers  of  the  camp,  so  that  you  may 
dispose  of  them  as  seems  fit  and  proper.” 

At  these  words  the  officers  went  through  the  same  cere- 
mony  as  Don  Fernando  had  done,  with  the  instruments  and 
arms  of  office  they  had  in  their  hands. 

The  soldiers  and  others  of  the  camp,  having  listened  in 
silence,  being  aware  of  the  studied  character  of  these  pro- 
ceedings, and  seeing  that  even  if  they  thought  differently,  it 
would  be  of  little  importance,  and  that  the  result  would  be 
against  them,  replied,  and  were  followed  by  the  friends  of 
Don  Fernando  and  Aguirre  in  the  same  strain.  They 
proclaimed  that  the  election  of  general,  in  the  person  of 
Don  Fernando,  had  been  made  with  the  consent  of  all, 
and  the  same  was  said  as  regarded  the  other  function- 
aries ; and  they  added  that,  if  it  were  deemed  necessary. 


64 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


they  would  re-elect  and  name  Don  Fernando  for  their  gene- 
ral, considering  that  they  were  fortunate  in  having  so  excel- 
lent and  generous  a cavalier  to  command  them ; and  thus 
they  supplicated  him  to  retain  his  command,  and  continue 
it  as  heretofore. 


CHAP.  XVI. 

1.  Don  Fernando  thanks  them  for  his  new  election , and  makes  it  known 
that  he  will  not  force  any  one  to  follow  him. — 2.  He  asks  the  soldiers 
to  take  oath  to  follow  him , and  all  promise  to  do  so,  except  three. — 
3.  They  all  take  the  oath  on  a missal  placed  on  an  altar. — 4.  Diffi- 
culties that  occur  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  employment  for  the 
people , at  this  spot. 

1.  By  this  proceeding  Don  Fernando  thought  that  he  had 
arrived  at  a knowledge  of  the  views  of  his  soldiers,  and  he 
returned  to  the  spot  where  he  had  left  the  partisan,  taking 
it  again  in  his  hands.  In  order  to  show  that  he  was  grate- 
ful for  his  re-election  as  general,  he  gave  the  soldiers 
feigned  thanks,  saying  that  he  was  under  great  obligations 
to  them ; and  that  he  would  do  his  best  to  merit  their 
favour.  He  then  gave  thanks  to  God  for  what  had  been 
decided  on,  declaring  that  justice  should  be  done  to  all,  and 
that  affairs  should  be  managed  in  such  a way  that  all  might 
thrive  in  riches  and  honours,  for  that  there  was  more  than 
sufficient  for  all  to  lay  their  hands  upon,  in  the  broad  and 
rich  lands  of  Piru,  whither  they  were  bound,  with  the 
intention  of  becoming  lords  of  the  soil.  But  all  the  camp 
knew  that  in  this  war,  which  was  made  against  the  king  of 
Castille  and  the  Indies,  some  engaged  in  it  of  their  own 
free  will,  and  some  were  forced  into  it.  Don  Fernando, 
however,  said  that  his  intention  in  this  rebellion  against 
his  king,  was  not  to  force  any  one  to  follow  him,  but  that 


THE  TRAITOR  AGTJIRRE. 


65 


each  man  should  declare  his  intention,  and  that  he  who 
wished  to  follow  him,  should  receive  land,  and  riches ; but 
that  he  who  thought  differently,  and  believed  that  the  expe- 
dition was  not  a legal  one,  and  did  not  wish  to  continue  with 
it,  if  there  were  enough  of  them  to  remain  behind,  secure 
in  some  Indian  village,  and  settle  there,  that  he  the  governor 
would  leave  behind  a superior  officer  (any  one  they  might 
select),  and  that  he  would  share  with  them  all  that  he  had 
of  arms,  munitions,  and  other  things  ; and  that  if  they  were 
not  in  sufficient  number  to  do  what  had  been  proposed,  he 
would  take  them  with  him  as  so  many  brothers,  and  leave 
them  in  the  first  friendly  village,  whence  they  might  dis- 
pose of  themselves  as  they  best  pleased.  That  they  should 
have  no  fears  of  declaring  what  they  wished,  for,  from  this 
moment,  he  gave  them  his  word  of  honour,  that  whatever 
their  views  were,  their  persons  should  be  safe,  and  that  he 
would  punctually  comply  with  what  he  had  promised. 

2.  Don  Fernando  moreover  added,  that  those  who  in- 
tended to  go  with  him  should  sign  their  names,  and  solemnly 
swear  that  they  would  maintain  the  war  against  the  lands  of 
Piru  by  fire  and  sword,  and  that  they  would  obey  their 
general  and  captains  in  all  things,  also  that  amongst  them- 
selves there  should  be  order  and  unanimity. 

The  soldiery  replied  that  they  were  ready  to  follow  Don 
Fernando,  and  that  they  would  take  the  oath,  and  sign  as 
he  had  suggested. 

Only  three  soldiers,  named  Francisco  Vasquez,  Juan  de 
Cabanas,  and  Juan  de  Vargas  Zapata,  boldly  said  to  Don 
Fernando  de  Guzman  and  his  friends,  that  they  would  not 
follow  them  in  war  against  his  majesty,  whom  they  recog- 
nized as  their  king  and  lord : and  that  on  this  account  they 
wished  to  be  excused  from  taking  the  oath,  and  signing. 

The  traitors  put  on  an  appearance  of  calmness  at  this 
announcement,  but  soon  the  venom  of  their  souls  was 
shown  (for  what  they. had  said  was  feigned),  and  they  replied, 

K 


66 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


that  as  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  three  to  join  the 
war,  they  had  no  occasion  for  their  arms ; and  so  their 
arms  were  taken  from  them  ; and  they  were  killed,  as  we 
shall  explain.  They  knew  what  would  be  their  doom,  and 
they  said  so  ere  they  determined  how  they  would  act,  but 
death  was  preferable  to  a life  of  treason  to  their  king. 

S.  It  being  too  late,  on  the  day  of  the  meeting,  it  was  left 
for  the  morrow  to  take  the  oaths  and  signatures  ; so  on  the 
following  day,  early  in  the  morning,  all  the  soldiers  in  the 
camp  were  brought  together,  and  Don  Fernando  ordered 
an  altar  to  be  prepared,  so  that  mass  might  be  said  in  sight 
of  all  : and,  calling  Padre  Alonso  Henao  (whom  Pedro 
de  Ursua  had  made  chaplain  and  vicar  of  the  army),  he  told 
him  to  robe  and  say  mass,  which  he  did.  The  effect  which 
the  traitors  wished  to  produce  by  this  celebration  of  the  mass 
was  apparent.  When  mass  was  over  (which  was  heard  by 
the  traitors  in  a spirit  allied  to  their  depraved  intentions), 
Don  Fernando,  without  allowing  the  priest  to  unrobe,  told 
the  assembled  soldiers  that  he  had  brought  them  together 
to  assist  at  that  ceremony,  that  there  might  be  greater 
unanimity  and  friendship,  and  that  they  might  have  true 
faith  in  each  other  : for  which  object  it  was  necessary  that 
the  oath  he  had  suggested  should  be  taken  by  all,  in  the 
most  solemn  manner  in  use  among  Christians.  He  then 
ordered  the  priest  (robed  as  he  was)  to  hold  the  consecrated 
host  in  his  hands  and  receive  the  oaths  from  all,  as  they 
came  up  to  him,  they  touching  the  host  and  missal  with 
their  hands.  Don  Fernando  commenced,  then  Lope  de 
Aguirre  and  the  rest  of  the  officers  ; then  came  the  rest, 
according  to  their  rank,  who  touched  the  host  and  missal, 
and  swore  by  God,  and  Santa  Maria,  his  most  glorious 
mother,  by  those  holy  works  of  the  Evangelists,  and  by  the 
consecrated  host,  that  they  would  be  unanimous  in  the  mat- 
ter of  the  war  that  they  were  about  to  prosecute  against 
the  kingdoms  of  Piru,  that,  between  them,  there  should  be 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


67 


no  difference  of  opinion,  and  that,  if  necessary,  they  would 
even  die  in  the  enterprise.  They  also  swore  faithfully  to 
aid  each  other,  without  considering  feelings  of  affection, 
relationship,  loyalty,  or  any  other  matter  that  might  retard 
or  disturb  the  fixed  plan  of  operations  ; and  that  in  all  that 
appertained  to  this  war,  they  would  have  for  their  general 
Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  obeying  him  and  doing  all  he 
and  his  ministers  commanded,  under  the  penalty  of  being 
perjurers  and  infamous  men. 

After  this  sacrilegious  and  wicked  oath  had  been  taken, 
Don  Fernando  caused  the  document  to  be  signed,  he  being 
the  first,  then  Aguirre  and  the  rest  of  the  officers  in  their 
order,  who  also  signed  the  document  as  to  the  fresh  election 
of  Don  Fernando  as  general.  Some,  however,  did  not  sign, 
with  the  design  that  by  not  doing  so,  they  might  be  con- 
sidered exempt  from  the  oath ; but,  as  there  were  so  many 
crowding  together,  there  were  some  who  did  not  sign,  and 
some  were  fearful  that  they  could  not  write  well  enough. 
There  were  doubtless  some  who,  by  not  signing,  thought 
that  they  would  be  free  from  crime,  or  absolved  from  punish- 
ment, if  the  royal  authorities  did  not  find  their  names  on  the 
list. 

The  proceedings  having  terminated,  it  soon  appeared  that 
the  principal  object  for  taking  the  oath,  was  to  unite  the 
friends  of  Juan  Alonso  de  la  Bandera  (who  were  soured  in 
consequence  of  Bandera’s  death)  with  Aguirre  and  his  fol- 
lowers, that  henceforward  there  might  be  no  more  discord 
nor  quarrels. 

Peace  appeared  to  be  established ; but,  being  so  unjust, 
Heaven  did  not  allow  it  to  continue,  for  there  soon  occurred 
many  misfortunes,  dissensions,  and  seditions ; and  they  killed 
each  other,  as  we  shall  see. 

4.  The  delay  in  building  the  brigantines  caused  much 
inconvenience,  which  hourly  increased  in  consequence  of 
the  idle  lives  of  the  soldiers  (a  nest  in  which  many  evils  are 
hatched,  and  the  principal  cause  of  what  happened  here). 


68 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Lope  de  Aguirre,  with  his  sanguinary  character  (enemy 
to  the  human  race),  was  always  craftily  employed  in  deceiv- 
ing the  soldiers,  and  placing  so  many  snares  in  their  way, 
that  they  could  scarcely  extricate  themselves  from  them. 

Day  and  night  was  Aguirre  immersed  in  wicked  designs. 
He  brought  forward  one  as  base  as  it  was  dangerous, 
namely 5 to  raise  Don  Fernando  to  such  a height  of  power, 
that  his  fall  would  be  the  more  certain  ; and,  having  dis- 
cussed his  views  with  Don  Fernando,  and  some  of  his 
friends,  so  that  the  latter  might  communicate  the  same  to 
the  soldiers,  he  ordered  them  to  repair  to  the  same  place 
where  Don  Fernando’s  lodging  stood,  and,  all  being  assem- 
bled, with  Aguirre  amongst  them,  armed  as  was  his  custom, 
and  accompanied  by  his  followers,  he  thus  addressed  them. 


CHAP.  XVII. 

1.  Aguirre  addresses  the  soldiers. — 2.  He , together  with  the  soldiers , pro- 
claims Fernando  de  Guzman  Prince  of  Pirii.- — 3.  Don  Fernando 
accepts  the  title  of  Prince , and  sets  up  an  establishment  accordingly. 
— 4.  Don  Fernando  takes  the  office  of  sargento  mayor  from  Sancho 
Pizarro  ( a friend  of  Ursua's ),  and  gives  it  to  Martin  Perez. 

1.  ce  Cavaliers,  we  have  not  forgotten,  for  it  is  not  many 
days  since,  that  we  named  for  our  Captain-general  Don 
Fernando  de  Guzman,  of  our  own  free  will,  and  without 
any  force,  for  all  were  duly  informed  that  full  liberty  was 
given  to  elect  whom  they  considered  most  fit ; and,  after  the 
election,  the  General  repeated  to  all  that  they  might  select 
the  road  that  best  pleased  them,  to  follow  or  not  the  war  in 
Piru,  and  those  who  did  not  wish  to  do  so,  have  not  on  that 
account  been  slighted,  as  is  well  known ; and  we  who  de- 
termined to  do  so,  promised,  on  oath,  to  comply  with  our 
vow  ; but  since  that  time  some  may  have  changed  their 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


69 


minds,  and  determined  to  do  something  that  appears  to  them 
better,  or  some  may  have  had  the  oath  forced  upon  them, 
and  may  say  that  they  are  compelled  to  follow  this  war,  against 
their  inclination.  From  this  moment,  I,  in  the  name  of  the 
General  my  lord,  and  as  his  maestro  del  campo,  make  known 
and  exhort  every  one  of  you  to  examine  into  what  you  have 
done  and  sworn  to,  and  if  you  feel  you  have  not  the  wish  to 
comply,  from  this  moment  you  shall  be  released  from  your 
oath,  and  permission  shall  be  given  to  you  (without  your 
incurring  any  pain)  to  declare  and  follow  what  may  appear 
best  to  you ; for  which  I give  my  word  and  honour,  and 
promise  to  keep  it  with  all,  as  has  been  kept  with  those 
cavaliers,  who  said  that  they  did  not  wish  to  follow  the  war, 
nor  fight  against  the  king ; whom  we  have  treated  as  bro- 
thers,  dividing  with  them  what  they  required.” 

2.  Some  who  wrere  present,  and  were  devoted  to  Don 
Fernando  and  Aguirre,  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  replied  that 
they  were  not  the  men  to  fall  back  from  their  word,  or  break 
the  oath  they  had  given,  particularly  in  so  important  a 
matter.  They  were  persuaded  that  the  enterprise  would 
be  successful,  they  were  constant  and  firm  to  follow  the  war, 
already  commenced,  and  which  they  had  sworn  to  prose- 
cute. 

Aguirre  seized  upon  this  opportunity,  and  said  : “ Yes, 
I perceive  you  are  indeed  firm  in  your  views,  and  that  such 
valiant  souls  are  not  only  able  to  subject  Piru  (for  it  is  only 
a single  province),  but  all  the  provinces  of  these  Indies, 
which  cannot  have  a good  and  proper  government  without  a 
king  at  their  head  to  govern  ; it  having  been  the  custom  in 
them  (since  they  have  been  discovered  and  conquered),  that 
the  lands  should  belong  to  him  who  conquered  and  sub- 
jected them.  For  this  object  we  have  elected  Don  Fernando 
de  Guzman  our  General  and  lord,  to  whom  by  right  these 
kingdoms  belong  (and  when  we  arrive  in  Piru,  we  will  give 
him  the  kingly  crown,  which  wiil  so  well  suit  his  brow), 


70 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


and  from  henceforth  we  will  hold,  recognize,  and  obey  him 
as  our  Prince  and  lawful  lord : to  which  end  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  that  we  forswear  our  allegiance  to  the  kingdoms  of 
Spain,  our  birthplace  ; and  declare  that  we  will  not  obey  the 
king  Don  Philip;  for  it  is  clear  that  no  one  can  serve  two  mas- 
ters. In  order  that  there  may  he  no  delay  in  such  an  import- 
ant matter,  and  for  the  benefit  of  all,  I will  commence,  and  I 
say  that  I denaturalize  myself  from  the  kingdoms  of  Spain, 
where  I was  horn ; and  if  I have  any  rights  there  in  conse- 
quence of  my  parents  being  Spaniards,  and  vassals  of  the 
king  Don  Philip,  I give  up  all  my  rights,  and  I deny  that 
he  is  my  king  and  lord ; and  I repeat  that  I know  him  not, 
neither  do  I wish  to  know  him,  nor  obey  him  as  such ; but 
rather,  being  in  possession  of  my  own  liberty,  I elect  from 
this  time  for  my  prince,  king,  and  natural  lord,  Don  Fer- 
nando de  Guzman;  and  I swear  and  promise  to  be  his  faith- 
ful vassal  and  to  die  in  his  defence,  as  he  is  my  lord  and 
king ; and  in  sign  of  my  recognition,  and  of  the  obedience  I 
owe  to  him,  I now  go  to  kiss  his  hand,  with  all  those  who 
choose  to  follow  and  approve  what  I have  said  in  this  elec- 
tion of  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  as  Prince  and  King  of  all 
Tierra  Fir  me ; and  he  who  does  not  do  this,  will  clearly 
show  that  his  thoughts  are  not  like  his  words  and  oath.” 

So  saying  Lope  de  Aguirre  went  (with  measured  steps, 
followed  by  the  captains  and  soldiers  of  the  camp)  to  the 
lodging  of  Don  Fernando,  and  said  to  him  : — 

ef  All  these  cavaliers  and  myself,  have  elected  Your  Excel- 
lency to  be  our  Prince  and  King ; and  as  such  we  come 
to  tender  you  our  obedience,  and  to  kiss  your  hand,  suppli- 
cating your  acquiescence.” 

Don  Fernando  accepted  the  honours  pressed  upon  him 
with  many  thanks.  He  would  not  give  them  his  hand  to 
kiss,  but  went  to  embrace  them,  beginning  with  Aguirre. 
They  all  called  him  Your  Excellency,  which  was  the  title 
he  had  for  the  rest  of  his  short  life. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


71 


From  this  moment  Don  Fernando  became  proud  and 
haughty,  with  the  hope  of  seeing  himself  crowned  as  king. 
Fie  became  grave  and  severe,  for  such  appeared  to  him 
necessary  for  one  who  in  a short  time  was  to  be  invested 
with  royal  honours.  He  ordered  that  his  habitation,  service, 
and  servants  should  correspond  with  that  of  other  princes ; 
so  he  appointed  his  gentleman  server,  major  domo,  carver, 
pages,  and  gentlemen,  to  whom  he  assigned  large  salaries, 
of  from  ten  to  twelve  thousand  dollars  and  more,  to  be  paid 
out  of  the  royal  treasury,  in  the  kingdoms  of  Piru.  He  also 
gave  higher  grades  to  the  captains  and  other  officers,  and 
increased  their  pay.  All  men  began  to  hold  him  in  such 
veneration  and  esteem,  that  they  not  only  took  off  their 
hats  to  his  person,  but  also  whenever  a decree  was  read 
despatched  by  his  hand,  which  was  always  headed  thus : 
“ Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  by  the  grace  of  God,  Prince 
of  Tierra  Firme,  and  of  Peru,”  etc.  Fie  always  dined  alone, 
and  he  was  served  at  table  with  all  ceremonies,  like  unto  a 
king  ; and  this  proud  prince  was  so  puffed  up  in  his  repre- 
sentation of  majesty,  that  it  looked  like  a comedy,  or  child’s 
play ; and  though  all  this  was  feigned,  I verily  believe  that 
had  he  wished  to  have  been  adored  as  a god,  they  would 
have  done  so,  and  he  would  have  consented ; to  such  a point 
had  the  wickedness  of  these  men  arrived. 

4.  Meanwhile  Aguirre  appeared  to  have  forgotten  his 
Christian  duties  and  obligations,  and,  as  a lost  man,  instead 
of  repenting  him  of  previous  crimes,  he  committed  greater 
ones,  taking  life  away,  and  becoming  a king  maker  and  a 
deposer  of  kings.  The  same  occurred  in  Castille,  during  the 
period  of  the  factions  of  the  commonalties,1  with  the  Cura 
Medina  and  Palomero  Davila ; for  when  the  communeros 
passed  the  cura’s  house,  he  treated  them  politely,  and  praised 

1 These  were  the  cities  of  Castille,  which,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
reign  of  Charles  Y,  rose  against  his  government,  in  support  of  Spanish 
liberty. 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


72 

them  in  his  sermons  and  conversations,  saying  that  it  was 
just  and  reasonable  to  follow  them  ; but  when  they  offended 
him,  by  taking  his  property  and  servants,  he  turned  over 
another  leaf  with  them,  and  instructed  his  parishioners  to  do 
the  same;  and  thus  the  kingdom  was  at  one  time  for  Don  Juan 
de  Padilla,  at  another  for  the  king  Don  Carlos.  So  Aguirre 
had  the  dexterity  to  elect  as  Prince  of  the  Indies  this  vain 
hidalgo,  and  in  a few  days  had  the  infamy  to  take  away  from 
him  more  than  he  had  given. 

A few  days  after  Don  Fernando  was  raised  to  regal  power, 
he  made  Martin  Perez  sargento  mayor  del  campo.  He  was  one 
of  those  who  had  been  without  office,  and  who  had  been  con- 
cerned in  the  death  of  the  governor  Ursua.  This  man  well 
understood  the  office  of  a rebel  and  mutineer,  and  was  the  first 
to  attack  Juan  de  Vargas,  Ursua’s  lieutenant,  with  such  fury 
that  his  sword  passed  through  Vargas,  wounding  his  com- 
panion on  the  other  side.  In  order  to  give  him  this  office, 
Don  Fernando  took  it  from  Sancho  Pizarro,  making  the 
latter  captain  of  horse. 


CHAP.  XVIII. 

1.  Various  projects  regarding  their  journey  to  Pirii. — 2.  The  plans  they 
intend  to  adopt  on  their  arrival  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  Panama , and 
Pirii.  Don  Fernando  bestows  titles  for  Encomiendas} — 3.  The  vile 
doings  of  other  traitors. — 4.  After  three  months,  the  brigantines  being 
ready,  they  leave  this  village,  and  prosecute  their  voyage. 

1.  All  being  now  arranged,  as  regarded  the  government 
of  the  expedition,  the  next  thing  to  settle  was,  the  best  and 
readiest  means  of  entering  Piru.  Their  hopes  of  success 
hourly  increased,  and  nothing  could  persuade  them  to  the 
contrary.  After  having  held  many  councils,  and  weighed 
1 These  were  very  large  tracts  of  land,  with  the  Indians  on  them. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


73 


their  measures  in  a thousand  ways,  they  resolved  that 
when  the  brigantines  were  ready  (which  were  to  be  built 
of  larger  dimensions  than  the  old  vessels),  they  would 
adopt  measures  to  get  out  to  sea ; and  as  to  the  victual- 
ling, they  resolved  to  go  to  the  island  of  Margarita,  where, 
owing  to  the  slight  resistance  the  few  inhabitants  of  that 
place  could  make,  in  a few  days  they  would  be  able  to 
lay  in  provisions,  such  as  bread,  meat,  and  water,  which 
they  were  to  procure  in  four  days,  and  if  there  were  any 
people  there  who  wished  to  join  them,  they  determined  to 
take  them  in  the  brigantines,  and  (without  stopping  at  any 
other  place)  to  make  for  the  port  of  Nombre  de  Dios,  and, 
landing  at  a river  hard  by,  at  night,  the  people  being  well 
armed,  to  march  straight  to  the  town  of  Nombre  de  Dios 
with  such  caution  that,  before  they  were  perceived,  they 
would  be  masters  of  the  place,  as  well  as  of  the  Sierra  of 
Capira  (in  which  was  the  pass  to  the  city  of  Panama),  for 
having  possession  of  this  pass,  no  communication  could  be 
made  with  Panama ; then  to  march  onwards  (leaving  the 
pass  guarded)  with  the  rest  of  the  people  and  their  Prince, 
until  they  secretly  arrived  upon  the  city  of  Nombre  de  Dios, 
to  kill  the  ministers  and  officers  of  the  king,  and  such  inha- 
bitants as  they  considered  unfavourable  to  them,  to  plunder 
and  burn  the  place  down,  leaving  it  in  such  a state,  that 
those  who  had  been  spared  by  flight,  would  not  be  able  to 
fortify  themselves  there,  nor  offer  opposition.  They  were 
then,  without  any  unnecessary  detention,  to  take  with  them 
the  friends  they  had  there,  and  march  upon  Panamd,  prac- 
tising the  same  cruelties  and  plunderings ; but  above  all 
things  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the  ships  in  the  port, 
so  that  no  information  about  them  could  be  taken  to  Piru. 

2.  This  being  done,  they  were  to  collect  all  the  artillery 
from  Nombre  de  Dios,  adding  it  to  that  of  Panama,  and  to 
fortify  themselves  at  the  latter  place  ; to  build  a galley  and 
other  vessels ; and, whilst  so  employed  in  Panama,  they  hoped 

L 


74 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


to  be  joined  by  people  from  Veragua,  Nicaragua,  and  other 
parts,  as  well  as  by  more  than  a thousand  run-away  negros, 
who,  desirous  of  their  liberty,  would  be  glad  indeed  to  be 
with  them,  and  to  enjoy  freedom  ; and  arming  all  with  the 
arms  that  had  been  plundered  from  the  two  cities,  they 
would  be  able  to  go  on  to  Piru  with  so  large  a force,  that, 
should  those  of  Piru  be  advised  of  their  coming,  and  be 
under  arms,  their  forces  would  be  less  than  those  of  the 
invaders.  Besides  being  well  found  in  warlike  stores,  people, 
and  arms,  they  hoped  that  the  numerous  friends  they  had  in 
Piru  would  join  them,  so  that  there  could  be  no  doubt,  that 
in  a short  time  they  would  be  in  possession  of  that  kingdom. 
Then  they  could,  at  their  leisure,  divide  its  great  riches 
amongst  themselves ; and  they  would  then  take  away  from 
its  inhabitants  their  wives  and  daughters,  each  one  naming 
which  woman  should  be  his,  for  they  knew  them  all.  Even 
the  negros  were  not  to  be  forgotten ; and  in  this  arrange- 
ment, should  any  one  say,  “ I wish  to  have  Doha  So  and 
So,’5  another  should  reply,  “ I was  thinking  of  taking  the 
same,  but  as  you  have  chosen  her,  there  will  not  be  wanting 
another  for  me,” particularly  as  there  were  many  Chapetonas,1 
coming  from  Spain. 

As  a wind  up  to  such  iniquitous  projects,  these  tyrants 
flattered  themselves  (independently  of  the  gifts  in  gold  their 
Prince  had  promised  them,  from  his  royal  treasury  in  Piru), 
that  they  would  be  given  titles  to  estates  in  that  land,  and 
the  receivers  of  such  titles  disposed  of  such  estates  (as  if 
they  were  really  in  possession),  without  for  a moment  con- 
sidering that  such  wickedness  would  lead  to  punishment,  as 
it  did. 

3.  They  might  have  called  to  mind  the  miserable  end  of 
Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  Piru,  when,  with  similar  intentions,  he 

1 Chapetona,  female  ; Chapeton,  male.  This  term,  and  Polizon  also, 
was  given  in  America  to  Spaniards  who  went  by  stealth  there,  or  with- 
out a passport. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


75 


rebelled  against  his  king ; and  although  during  his  rebel- 
lion he  had  a large  and  well  armed  force,  and  was  victorious 
over  some  of  the  loyal  vassals  of  the  emperor,  as  when  he 
conquered  and  killed  the  viceroy  Blasco  Nunez,  with  the 
greater  portion  of  his  army ; which  made  him  proud  indeed 
with  his  short  prosperity ; yet  in  the  end  he  was  made 
prisoner,  his  army  routed  at  the  battle  of  Xaquixaguana  by 
the  president  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  and  his  death  was  a miser- 
able one.  A similar  fate  befel  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron, 
who  rebelled  against  his  king,  and,  with  only  three  hundred 
followers,  defeated  the  royal  army  one  thousand  two  hun- 
dred strong,  in  the  battle  of  Chuquinga.  He  gained  other 
victories,  and  was  better  found  in  all  ways  than  our  Don 
Fernando  de  Guzman ; yet  he  was  beaten  by  Gomez  de 
Solis.  They  might  have  had  many  other  examples  before 
their  eyes  (if  their  eyes  had  been  open)  of  others  who  had 
risen  in  these  Indies  with  the  same  objects,  in  which  many 
of  the  followers  of  Don  Fernando  had  been  engaged;  yet  all 
these  mutinous  projects  had  had  a bad  end.  The  recollec- 
tion of  the  wild  life  they  had  led  during  their  participation 
in  various  revolts,  spurred  them  on  the  more  in  the  present 
disloyal  enterprise,  without  for  one  moment  anticipating  the 
miserable  results  that  must  follow. 

4.  In  these  and  other  visionary  schemes  they  passed  the 
three  months  during  which  the  two  brigantines  were  build- 
ing, and  getting  ready  for  sea.  The  brigantines  had  no 
upper  works  nor  decks,  but  such  strong  hulls,  that  they  might 
have  been  armed  as  vessels  of  war  of  three  hundred  tons. 

The  whole  of  the  people  embarked  in  them,  and  some 
new  canoes.  They  left  this  place,  which  they  called  that 
“ of  the  Brigantines ,”  and,  navigating  the  river  downwards, 
came  the  same  day  to  another  village  of  the  same  province 
of  Machiparo  on  the  right  hand,  where  they  slept  that 
night,  starting  with  early  morn  the  next  day,  and  by  a bend 
entered  an  arm  of  the  river  to  the  left,  by  Aguirre’s  orders. 


76 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


who  feared,  if  they  went  to  the  right  (for  it  was  in  that  direc- 
tion some  hoped  to  come  upon  the  rich  lands  they  had  been 
in  quest  of,  according  to  the  information  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians)  that  they  would  remain  in  those  lands,  and  that 
dissensions  would  arise  as  to  settling  them.  It  had  come  to 
Aguirre’s  knowledge  that  there  were  many  soldiers,  who 
would  rather  have  remained  in  any  moderately  fair  pro- 
vince, than  go  upon  the  present  mutinous  expedition.  So 
Aguirre  arranged  to  make  a turn  out  of  the  way  of  their 
direct  route,  and,  having  navigated  three  days  and  one 
night  in  this  westerly  direction,  they  came  to  a few  empty 
huts  (for  the  inhabitants  had  fled),  in  a miserable  wet  coun- 
try and  partially  flooded,  where  the  air  was  filled  with 
mosquitos,  which  preyed  dreadfully  on  the  people. 

The  huts  were  square,  and,  being  covered  with  straw, 
rather  astonished  them  ; for  they  had  not  seen,  in  the  long  dis- 
tance they  had  left  behind,  any  but  such  as  were  thatched 
with  palms,  nor  had  they  seen  the  grassy  plains  whence  the 
straw  could  have  been  procured,  to  thatch  the  huts.  Those 
soldiers  who  wished  to  be  satisfied  on  this  point,  dared  not 
ask  some  Indians,  who  were  too  old  to  fly,  where  the  lands 
were  whence  they  got  the  straw,  for  fear  the  friends  of 
Aguirre,  observing  them  ask  questions,  should  think  they 
were  inquiring  about  the  rich  lands  they  had  originally  set 
out  in  search  of.1 

1 Aguirre  seems  to  have  entered  some  mouth  of  the  Japura,  and,  by 
going  up  one  of  the  branches  which  communicate  with  the  Rio  Negro, 
to  have  finally  reached  the  latter  river. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


77 


CHAP.  XIX. 

1.  They  arrive  at  this  Indian  village , where  they  'pass  Passion  week  and 
Easter ; Aguirre  causes  a soldier  to  be  strangled. — 2.  They  depart 
after  Easter , and  stop  at  another  very  large  Indian  town , where  they 
find  abundance  of  provisions  and  wine  ( chicha ). — 3.  Some  customs 
of  the  Indians  of  this  place. — 4.  How  they  arranged  to  obtain  pro- 
visions here ; and  how  some  scruples  occur  to  Bon  Fernando  and 
his  friends. 

1.  Before  they  arrived  at  this  village,  Alonzo  de  Mon- 
toya went  with  a party  in  canoes,  in  search  of  provisions,  up 
a small  branch  of  the  river.  Montoya  found,  at  a small 
settlement,  dried  fish  and  some  maize,  which  the  Indians  had 
not  had  time  to  take  away  when  they  fled.  The  Prince 
Don  Fernando  determined  to  remain  eight  days  to  celebrate 
Passion  week,  which  had  already  commenced,  and  to  depart 
after  Easter.  This  would  allow  of  time  to  rest,  and  to 
search  for  provisions.  The  fish  caught  by  the  soldiers,  as 
well  as  more  brought  by  the  Indians,  and  bartered,  was  of 
great  use ; and  the  love  of  barter  brought  the  Indians  peace- 
fully from  their  hiding  places,  to  treat  with  the  Spaniards. 

They  were  quite  naked,  they  used  the  same  weapons,  and 
spoke  the  same  language  as  those  higher  up  the  river ; so  it 
was  presumed  they  were  of  the  same  nation. 

It  happened  on  one  of  the  days  of  Easter,  that  a soldier 
named  Pedro  Alonso  Casto,  who  had  been  alguazil  to  Pedro 
de  Ursua,  in  talking  to  another  man  named  Villatoro,  com- 
plained of  the  small  consideration  the  mutineers  had  shown 
in  regard  to  him,  and  that  they  had  not  given  him  a par- 
ticular post  he  desired  ; and,  laying  hold  of  his  beard  with 
his  hand,  repeated  the  following  lines  from  Virgil : “ Audaces 
fortuna  juvat,  timidosque  repellit” — Fortune  aids  the  bold, 
but  overthrows  the  timid.  There  was  not  wanting  one  (who 
had  not  the  fear  of  God  before  him)  who  made  this  speech 
known  to  Aguirre,  and  it  was  noticed  that  he  was  growing 


78 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


morose,  because  many  days  had  elapsed  since  an  occasion 
had  offered  to  kill  any  one ; and  in  order  that  Easter  might 
not  pass  without  glutting  his  infernal  appetite  for  human 
blood,  he  had  both  these  soldiers  arrested,  intending  to 
strangle  them  for  what  they  had  said.  Don  Fernando,  being 
advised  that  the  men  were  seized  (and  well  knowing  the 
desire  of  Aguirre  to  execute  them),  sent  to  say  that  they 
were  not  to  be  killed  ; but  when  the  messenger  arrived, 
Pedro  Alonso  Casto  had  been  garotted,  and  the  other  was 
on  the  point  of  suffering ; so,  by  order  of  the  Prince,  his 
death  was  delayed  for  some  days.  At  the  same  time  the 
office  of  alferez-general,  which  had  been  given  to  Alonso 
de  Villena  (he  was  one  of  the  assassins  of  Ursua),  was  taken 
from  him,  because  it  was  considered  too  important  a post 
for  one  of  his  low  blood ; but,  that  he  might  not  be  alto- 
gether out  of  humour,  he  was  made  gentleman  server, 
and  a considerable  salary  was  assigned  to  him,  to  be  paid 
out  of  the  royal  treasury  of  Piru ; and  to  prevent  any 
bickerings  as  to  who  should  have  his  former  office,  it  was 
not  filled  up. 

2.  The  feast  of  Easter  being  passed,  the  next  morning,  at 
daylight,  they  left  that  village,  and  in  the  evening  came  to  a 
larger  one  on  the  banks  of  the  river ; where  there  was  abun- 
ance  of  provisions  in  the  houses,  but  the  inhabitants  had 
hurriedly  fled,  fearing  the  Spaniards.  They  had  not  had 
time  to  hide  the  maize  and  other  eatables,  and  probably  the 
natives  thought  that  the  Spaniards  would  remain  there  long, 
being  so  near  the  previous  resting  place,  where  they  had 
remained  a long  time. 

This  village  was  on  the  cliffs  above  the  river,  on  a narrow 
island,  bounded  on  one  side  by  the  waters  of  the  river,  and 
on  the  other  by  a marsh.  The  island  was  not  broader  than 
a shot  from  a cross-bow  would  reach,  but  its  length  was 
nearly  two  leagues,  and  it  was  lined  with  habitations. 

A sort  of  wine,  made  from  many  things,  and  of  a pasty 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


79 


substance,  was  found  here,  which  was  kept  in  large  jars, 
holding  about  five  hundred  weight.  It  was  left  for  a certain 
time  to  ferment,  as  if  it  were  juice  of  the  grape,  and  then 
put  into  other  vessels.  When  it  was  ready  for  drinking,  it 
was  first  mixed  with  water,  for  its  strength  was  such  that 
drinking  it  pure  would  have  caused  drunkenness,  more  so 
than  wine  from  grapes.1 

The  Indians  had  large  buildings  stored  with  this  liquor, 
and  if  the  Spaniards  had  remained,  they  would  have  emptied 
them,  for  they  liked  the  drink. 

3.  The  Spaniards  did  their  best  to  be  friendly  with  the 
Indians,  in  which  there  was  no  difficulty,  as  the  soldiers 
bartered  for  what  they  wanted,  and  these  natives  were  fond 
of  trading,  and,  being  pleased  with  what  the  soldiers  gave 
them  in  exchange,  they  would  not  leave  the  camp,  but  rather 
hired  themselves  to  row  canoes,  grind  corn,  make  bread  and 
wine,  and  render  other  services.  They  were  useful,  and 
kind,  and  although  some  of  the  soldiers  used  them  ill,  they 
did  not  discontinue  their  bartering,  nor  did  they  make  much 
ado  when  the  cruel  Spaniards  killed  some  of  them. 

They  became  crafty  in  their  barterings,  and  they  would 
come  at  night  and  steal  from  the  heads  of  the  beds  of  the 
Spaniards,  clothes,  arms,  and  whatever  they  could  lay  their 
hands  on,  without  fearing  severe  chastisement  for  what  they 
had  done.  It  appeared  that  thieving  was  not  considered  a 
crime  by  them.  Sometimes  the  Spaniards  would  imprison 
them  for  these  thefts,  when  their  companions  would  come 
and  ransom  them,  bringing  manatees  (cow-fish),  turtle, 
hicoteas,  fish,  and  other  food,  but  the  pilferers  were  not 
let  off  without  having  first  received  some  slight  punish- 
ment. 

They  were  a well  disposed  people,  quite  naked ; and  used 
the  same  arms,  darts,  and  macanas  (a  sort  of  club),  as  those 

1 This  is  the  chiclia , or  fermented  liquor,  used  by  the  Indians  : made 
from  maize,  yucas,  etc. 


80 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


of  Machiparo.  Their  houses  were  large  and  square,  and 
covered  with  palms  leaves,  which  were  abundant.1 

The  Indians  had  stored  a quantity  of  large  cedar  timber 
in  their  village,  brought  down  by  the  river,  from  which 
they  made  their  canoes,  and  built  their  houses.  The  muti- 
neers considered  this  a good  place  to  finish  building  the 
brigantines,  on  account  of  the  quantity  of  timber  here,  as 
well  as  the  abundance  of  food. 

4.  They  encamped  as  follows.  In  the  lower  portion  of  the 
Indian  town,  the  Prince  took  up  his  quarters  with  his  officers, 
gentlemen,  and  some  captains  ; above  him,  and  nearly  in 
the  centre,  was  Lope  de  Aguirre,  and,  as  he  was  always 
meditating  some  diabolical  act  or  other,  he  caused  the  bri- 
gantines to  be  moored  near  to  his  lodging,  saying  that  he 
would  thus  have  them  under  his  own  eye,  in  order  to 
quicken  the  work.  But  he  had  another  object,  for,  being 
in  the  centre  of  the  camp,  he  could  thus  command  more  of 
it  than  his  Prince.  They  began  to  finish  the  vessels,  build- 
ing them  higher,  and  putting  decks  to  them,  so  that  they 
might  hold  more  people,  be  better  ballasted,  and  safer  at  sea. 

For  this  object  all  the  Spanish  and  negro  workmen,  who 
understood  ship-building,  lost  no  time,  and  some  soldiers  also 
assisted,  but  it  took  a month  to  conclude  the  work.  During 
this  time,  in  consequence  of  the  want  of  occupation  of  the 
soldiers,  difficulties  occurred ; some  caused  by  feelings  of 
conscience  on  the  part  of  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman  and  his 
friends,  who  became  troubled  in  mind  with  the  cruel  and 
unjust  death  of  Ursua.  Then  they  considered  the  small 
power  they  had  to  carry  into  effect  their  idea  of  taking 
Piru,  into  which  plot  Aguirre  had  thrust  them.  There  also 

1 These  Indians  may  have  been  the  Uaupes  of  the  Rio  Negro,  de- 
scribed by  Wallace  ; or  more  probably  the  Juris.  The  latter  dwell 
between  the  rivers  Putumayu  and  Japura,  and  are  also  found  on  the 
Rio  Negro.  Their  huts  are  thatched  with  palm  leaves.  In  1775  they 
were  ruled  by  a chief  named  Machiparo. — Southey’s  Brazil , iii,  p.  721  ; 
Wallace,  p.  510. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


81 


fell  upon  them  the  fear  of  human  as  well  as  of  divine 
chastisement,  which  comes  whence  it  is  least  expected,  to 
take  that  vengeance  on  such  grave  crimes,  as  they  had  been 
guilty  of,  which  they  already  began  to  see  was  approaching. 

These  thoughts,  and  the  sparks  of  the  Christianity  in 
which  they  had  been  brought  up,  caused  them  to  waver. 
They  thought  amongst  themselves  that  they  would  be  lost 
and  ruined  by  following  the  projected  plan  of  war  with 
Piru  ; and  that  the  only  way  of  escape  was  to  retrace  their 
steps,  hand  themselves  over  to  the  ministers  of  justice,  and 
be  punished,  as  they  deserved.  By  acting  thus,  much  that 
they  had  done  would  be  forgotten,  if  they  now  went  in 
search  of  the  rich  lands  they  had  started  to  discover,  and 
settled  in  them  ; and  they  hoped  that,  although  the  king 
might  punish  them,  it  would  not  be  with  great  severity, 
after  adding  to  the  riches  of  his  dominions. 


CHAP.  XX. 

1.  Don  Fernando  calls  a council, in  which  it  is  determined  to  hill  Aguirre, 
as  it  appeared  necessary  to  do  so. — 2.  Aguirre  and  his  friends  get 
more  arms,  taking  them  from  the  rest. — 3.  He  divides  the  soldiers 
into  companies,  such  an  arrangement  appearing  to  him  better  for  his 
designs. — 4.  Aguirre  arrests  Gonzalo  Duarte,  Don  Fernando'1 s 
mayordomo,  with  the  intention  of  hilling  him,  but  afterwards  they 
become  friends. 

1.  Don  Fernando  considered  it  necessary  to  call  his  friends, 
and  the  less  evil  intentioned  soldiers  in  the  camp  together 
to  hold  a council,  without  letting  Aguirre  know  of  it,  whom 
he  hated  much  more  than  his  own  sins  ; the  object  being  to 
countermand  the  return  to  Piru.  They  all  met  in  the  house 
of  Don  Fernando,  that  each  might  give  his  opinion  as  to 
whether  the  expedition  should  return  to  Piru,  or  go  in 

M 


82 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


search  of  the  land  of  the  Omaguas.  The  last  measure  was 
considered  by  the  council  to  be  the  wisest  ; but  there 
was  a great  difficulty  to  surmount,  namely,  the  opposite 
views  entertained  by  Aguirre.  As  long  as  he  and  his  fami- 
liars opposed,  nothing  could  be  done,  for  they  were  more  in 
numbers,  and  the  most  daring.  The  council  then  agreed 
to  remove  this  great  obstacle,  by  taking  Aguirre’s  life,  and 
this  was  to  he  done  by  sending  for  him  at  once.  It  was 
expected  that  he  would  come  unprepared,  not  being  aware 
of  his  danger,  and  when  he  came  before  them,  they  intended 
to  kill  him  ; for  if  he  was  not  got  rid  of  thus  briefly,  it  would 
be  impossible  to  prevent  his  becoming  aware  of  their  inten- 
tions, and  then  they  could  not  be  carried  into  effect. 

They  were  all  agreed ; when  the  devil,  who  is  always 
ready,  God  willing,  to  favour  his  own,  and  sustain  them  for 
some  time,  to  commit  greater  sins,  prompted  Alonso  de  Mon- 
toya, one  of  the  council,  to  say,  that  it  was  not  prudent  at  that 
moment  to  kill  Aguirre.  He  said  that  if  they  sent  for  him, 
he  would  come,  but  accompanied  by  some  of  his  friends,  and, 
instead  of  their  killing  him,  he  might  kill  some  of  them  ; so 
it  would  be  better  to  put  off  his  death,  until  they  were  on 
their  voyage  down  the  river,  when  Aguirre  might  be  sent 
for  to  come  on  board  the  Prince’s  brigantine,  to  speak  to  him 
alone,  and  thus,  without  doing  harm  to  others,  they  could 
kill  Aguirre. 

2.  Don  Fernando  considered  this  a good  plan,  for  he  was 
of  a kind  disposition,  and  an  enemy  to  severity  and  death  ; 
so  he  approved  of  this  course,  and  it  was  to  be  effected  in 
the  manner  which  had  been  last  proposed.  The  council 
were  of  the  same  opinion,  because  it  was  the  will  of  their 
Prince,  although  against  their  own  views  ; for  it  was  certain 
that  if  they  did  not  get  rid  of  Aguirre  at  once,  as  had  been 
at  first  resolved,  greater  troubles  would  succeed,  and  that 
he  would  get  rid  of  all  those  "who  had  conspired  against  him ; 
as  did  occur,  for  during  the  course  of  his  tyranny  not  one 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


83 


of  these  escaped  his  vengeance,  from  the  Prince  down- 
wards. 

Not  a day  passed  that  Aguirre  did  not  draw  more  fol- 
lowers to  his  side,  from  amongst  those  who  resembled  him  in 
atrocity,  intention,  and  ambition ; whom  he  managed  to 
supply  with  the  best  arms  in  the  camp,  taking  such  from 
those  he  was  not  sure  of,  on  the  pretext  that  they  were  not 
mindful  of  warlike  affairs,  and  that  they  did  not  take  such 
care  of  their  arms  as  was  required  of  them  ; and,  as  if  in- 
dignant on  this  matter,  he  took  the  arms  from  them  and  gave 
them  to  others,  who,  he  said,  would  take  better  care  of  them. 
In  this  manner  he  and  his  followers  became  possessed  of  the 
best  armour  and  arms  in  the  camp  ; not  only  of  those  who 
died,  or  whom  he  killed  (whose  property  was  under  his 
control),  but  of  those  who  were  living ; and  thus  the  only 
useful  arms  were  in  the  hands  of  his  party. 

3.  It  appeared  convenient  to  Aguirre  that  the  soldiers 
should  be  divided  into  companies  of  equal  numbers,  so  that 
one  captain  should  not  have  more  men  than  another ; and  he 
determined  to  divide  them  into  as  many  companies  as 
possible,  of  forty  men  each,  he  himself  naming  some  of  his 
friends  as  captains  of  some  of  the  companies ; and  in  some 
of  the  other  companies  he  put  those  soldiers  who  were 
devoted  to  him,  so  that  he  might  have  assistance  from  all 
sides,  when  required.  The  Prince’s  guard  consisted  of  forty 
soldiers,  and  amongst  these  he  introduced  some  of  his  parti- 
zans.  He  was  now  the  leading  hand  in  disposing  of  affairs, 
and  he  favoured  his  allies  ; his  power  increased,  his  wish  to 
command  was  greater  than  that  of  his  Prince,  and  he  was 
more  readily  obeyed  ; thus  it  was  not  difficult  to  foresee  that 
this  state  of  things  would  end  in  trouble. 

One  Gonzalo  Duarte,  mayordomo  mayor  to  Don  Pernando, 
fearing  what  might  happen  to  him,  from  the  high  hand 
Aguirre  was  taking,  also  recollecting  that  he  had  once  con- 
spired with  Aguirre,  and  thinking  that  what  the  Prince  com- 


84 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


mantled  would  be  obeyed,  obtained  a promise  from  him, 
that  no  judge  or  captain  of  the  camp  should  have  any  juris- 
diction whatever  over  him,  but  that  he  should  be,  in  all 
things,  amenable  only  to  the  Prince,  for  any  matter,  how- 
ever atrocious,  he  might  be  concerned  in. 

4.  It  was  not  long  before  this  arrangement  came  to  Aguirre’s 
ears,  and,  knowing  why  Duarte  had  put  himself  in  this  posi- 
tion, and  wishing  to  show  him  that  he  could  not  escape  him, 
Aguirre  went  and  made  him  his  prisoner,  intending  to 
strangle  him  at  once,  as  he  would  have  done,  if  Don  Fer- 
nando (hearing  that  his  mayordomo  was  arrested)  had  not 
gone  in  person,  and  taken  him  out  of  prison.  Aguirre’s 
diabolical  rage  knew  no  bounds,  when  he  was  informed  that 
his  prey  had  escaped  his  hands  ; he  rushed  to  Don  Fer- 
nando’s dwelling,  and,  with  ferocious  language,  throwing 
himself  on  the  ground  before  him,  fire  flashing  from  his  eyes, 
and  foam  from  his  mouth,  supplicated  that  the  prisoner 
might  be  given  up  to  him,  for  that  he  wanted  to  punish  him 
for  many  atrocious  crimes  he  had  committed  in  the  service, 
and  that  he  would  not  rise  from  where  he  was,  until  he 
had  with  his  own  sword  (which  he  drew  from  the  scabbard) 
cut  his  head  off. 

Don  Fernando  begged  him  to  rise  and  be  calm;  and  pro- 
mised that  he  would  examine,  and  see  what  Duarte  had 
done,  and  that  he  would  punish  him  if  he  had  been  culpable. 
The  officers  present  also  became  mediators,  pacifying  the 
infernal  fury  of  Aguirre,  and  doing  their  best  to  make  them 
friends,  seeing  that  in  this  they  would  please  Don  Fernando. 

Duarte  now  explained  that  Aguirre  should  be  considerate 
to  him,  adding  that  he  had  no  cause  to  treat  him  so,  for 
Aguirre  well  knew  that  when,  in  the  village  of  the  Motilones, 
he  had  conspired  and  wished  to  kill  Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  to 
make  Don  Martin  General  (he  whom  we  have  said  Ursua 
sent  back  to  Pirn,  in  consequence  of  what  Pedro  de  Ahasco 
told  him),  that  Aguirre  was  to  be  maestro  del  campo,  and 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


85 


he,  Duarte,  captain,  and  that  they  were  to  go  back  to  Piru. 
A long  time  had  passed,  and,  although  he  had  been  so  inti- 
mate a friend  of  Ursua’s,  he  had  never  breathed  a word  of 
this  conspiracy  to  any  one,  and  he  never  could  have  sup- 
posed that  Aguirre  would  repay  his  silence  by  taking  his 
life.  Aguirre  (as  one  who  cared  but  little  for  his  wicked- 
ness being  brought  to  light)  replied  that  what  Duarte  had 
said  was  true,  and  that  he  was  now  mindful  how  Duarte 
had  befriended  him,  and  that  he  was  ready  to  serve  him  if 
he  required  it ; so  Aguirre  became  calm,  and  they  (at  the 
request  of  the  others)  embraced  each  other,  and  became 
friends  for  the  time;  but  soon  afterwards  Duarte  paid  dearly 
for  this  friendship,  by  becoming  his  victim. 


CHAP.  XXI. 

] . Difficulties  between  Captain  Lorenzo  Salduendo  and  Aguirre , as  to  the 
accommodation- for  Doha  lnes  on  board  the  brigantines. — 2.  Aguirre 
kills  Salduendo,  and  by  his  orders  two  soldiers  kill  Doha  lnes. — 
3.  Discussion  between  Don  Fernando  and  Aguirre  as  to  the  death  of 
ftalduendo. — 4.  Aguirre  pacifies  Don  Fernando , but,  on  account  of 
an  idle  report  which  two  captains  repeat  to  Aguirre , he  determines  to 
kill  Don  Fernando. 

1 . Doha  Inez  de  Atienza  had  not  left  the  evil  ways  she 
had  continued  in  since  she  left  Piru  (although  she  had  wit- 
nessed so  many  violent  deaths,  which  Providence  had  placed 
before  her),  and  was  living  as  the  mistress  of  Lorenzo  Sal- 
duendo,  captain  of  Don  Fernando’s  guard.  Doha  Inez  had 
with  her,  as  a companion,  a Doha  Maria  de  Soto,  a mestiza, 
who  was  the  mistress  of  another  man  in  the  expedition.  All 
being  ready  to  start,  Salduendo  busied  himself  in  arranging 
how  the  females  and  their  baggage  could  be  accommodated 
in  the  brigantines  ; and,  that  they  might  repose  comfortably 


86 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


at  night*  he  wished  to  send  some  mattresses  on  board  for 
them.  Aguirre  (either  because  he  did  not  like  the  women, 
or  that  he  was  jealous  that  any  one  should  have  a female 
companion),  told  Salduendo  that  the  mattresses  could  not 
go  in  the  brigantines,  as  they  took  up  too  much  room,  inas- 
much as  there  were  a great  many  people,  and  other  more 
important  things,  which  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  take. 
Thus  Aguirre  excused  himself,  and  Salduendo  went  away  in 
an  angry  mood,  returning  to  his  lodging,  where  he  found 
the  two  women  awaiting  a favourable  reply  from  Aguirre ; 
and,  having  told  them  what  had  passed,  and  the  angry  way 
in  which  he  had  been  refused,  in  an  offended  spirit  he  flung 
away  from  him  a lance  he  had  in  his  hands,  saying,  “ Am  I 
to  beg  for  favours  from  Lope  de  Aguirre  at  these  my  years  ?” 

These  words  were  repeated  to  Aguirre,  with  others  that 
Doha  Inez  had  uttered  the  previous  day,  whilst  burying  a 
mestiza  servant  of  hers,  when  she  exclaimed  weeping,  “God 
pardon  thee,  my  child  ; but  ere  many  days  thou  wilt  have 
many  companions  with  thee  in  the  grave.” 

&.  When  Aguirre  was  told  these  words,  uttered  by  Sal- 
duendo, his  suspicious  soul  easily  interpreted  the  meaning 
he  intended  they  should  have,  that  Salduendo  meditated 
some  evil  against  him,  or  even  to  kill  him  ; so  he  determined 
to  collect  some  friends,  and  go  and  kill  Salduendo  ; who, 
being  advised  of  his  proceedings,  and  guessing  that  the  result 
might  be  fatal,  went  to  the  Prince  and  told  him  his  fears, 
as  to  Aguirre’s  intention  of  killing  him.  Don  Fernando 
told  him  not  to  fear,  and  that  he  would  settle  the  matter ; 
and,  calling  Gonzalo  Guiral  de  Fuentes,  one  of  his  captains, 
he  told  him  to  go  to  Aguirre  and  say,  in  his  name,  that  he 
must  look  to  it  that  Salduendo  was  not  molested,  for  that 
he  was  in  fear  of  his  life ; and  also  to  do  his  best  to  calm 
Aguirre’s  anger. 

Gonzalo  Guiral  went  on  his  mission  as  quickly  as  possible, 
but  as  Aguirre  was  most  active  in  his  diabolical  actions, 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


87 


Guiral  met  him  on  the  road  with  his  troop  of  murderous 
followers,  who  were  proceeding  with  hurried  steps  to  kill 
Salduendo.  Guiral  gave  Aguirre  the  message  from  Don  Fer- 
nando, who  took  as  little  notice  of  it,  as  of  the  Prince  whom 
he  had  placed  in  power ; and,  without  stopping,  he  went 
onwards  until  he  arrived  at  Don  Fernando’s  house,  when 
he  and  his  partizans  attacked  Salduendo  with  swords  and 
lances.  Don  Fernando  tried  to  defend  the  victim,  he  com- 
manded and  begged  that  they  would  not  kill  Salduendo  ; 
but  it  was  too  late,  he  was  soon  a murdered  man,  like 
unto  Pedro  de  Ursua  his  governor,  whom  he  had  assisted  to 
slay. 

The  cruel  beast  Aguirre,  now  bathed  in  the  blood  of 
Salduendo,  longed  to  shed  that  of  Doha  Inez,  and,  call- 
ing to  mind  his  distaste  for  her,  and  some  threats  of  hers, 
he  determined  that  she  should  suffer  a similar  punishment ; 
so  he  ordered  one  of  his  sergeants,  called  Anton  Llamoso, 
and  one  Francisco  Carrion,  a mestizo,  to  go  and  kill  her 
wherever  they  might  find  her.  These  men  had  already 
been  accustomed  to  slaughter,  and  this  murder  of  a woman 
rendered  them  more  hardened  for  such  offices  in  future. 

No  sooner  was  the  sanguinary  command  given,  than  the 
murderers  wrnnt  to  where  Doha  Inez  lodged,  and  rushing 
upon  her  with  drawn  swords,  took  her  life  in  such  a 
barbarous  manner  that  after  her  death,  even  the  most  har- 
dened men  in  the  camp,  at  sight  of  the%iangled  victim, 
were  broken-hearted,  for  this  was  the  most  cruel  act  that 
had  been  perpetrated. 

Tier  property,  which  was  of  considerable  value,  was 
seized,  and  without  calling  in  the  notary  to  take  an  inventory 
(desiring  to  be  paid  for  their  bloody  work),  the  cruel 
butchers  divided  it  between  them. 

3.  Whilst  these  assassins  were  killing  Dona  Inez,  Don 
Fernando  had  the  lifeless  body  of  Salduendo  before  his  eyes. 
Fie  upbraided  Aguirre  with  want  of  respect  for  his  person. 


88 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


and  for  not  heeding  him  when  he  had  sent  to  him,  praying 
that  he  would  not  kill  the  captain  of  his  guard ; that  he  had 
come  with  cruelty  as  well  as  insolence  to  commit  the  murder 
in  his  presence,  and  this  he  told  him  in  a bitter  tone. 
Aguirre,  valuing  the  help  he  had  from  his  followers  more 
than  any  favour  the  Prince  could  show  him,  addressed  Don 
Fernando  in  an  arrogant  and  insulting  manner.  Amongst 
other  things,  he  said  that  Don  Fernando  did  not  understand 
or  know  how  to  govern  in  affairs  appertaining  to  war,  and 
if  he  (Aguirre)  were  wise,  and  wished  to  manage  things 
well,  he  ought  not  to  put  his  trust  in  a Sevillano,  for  he 
knew  their  character  for  double-dealing.  Now,  as  Don 
Fernando  was  a native  of  Seville,  this  was  a terrible  thrust 
at  him.  He  added  that  he  should  be  cautious  and  look  to 
his  person,  as  he  (Aguirre)  should  do  to  his,  for  men  in 
the  position  of  his  Excellency,  should  have  more  care  of 
themselves  than  he  had ; and,  for  the  future,  when  he 
wished  to  have  a council  of  war,  he  would  advise  him  to 
have  fifty  well-armed  friends  in  his  train  prepared  for 
whatever  might  happen ; and  that  it  was  better  for  him 
to  partake  of  the  pebble-stones  of  Pariacaca,  than  of  the 
pancakes  given  to  him  by  Duarte  his  majordomo  ;l  and 
he  added  many  other  observations  of  the  same  kind.  He 
then  left  his  Prince,  returning  to  his  quarters  with  his 
friends. 

4.  Aguirre  had  not  been  long  in  his  quarters  when  he  deter- 
mined to  return  to  the  Prince,  and  give  him  apparently  peace- 
ful explanations,  telling  his  Excellency  that  he  ought  not  to 
complain  that  Salduendo  had  been  slain  before  his  eyes,  for 
he  intended  to  have  killed  him,  Aguirre,  who  was  one  of  the 
Prince’s  most  faithful  and  loyal  servants  ; so  if  he  had  lost  one 
friend,  a better  friend  had  been  spared ; that  he  would  guard 
him  with  more  fidelity  than  any  other  in  the  camp,  for  that  he 

1 u Fuera  muy  mas  a proposito  gustar  de  los  guijarros  de  Pariacaca, 
que  de  los  buiiuelos  que  le  dava  Gonzalo  Duarte  su  mayordomo  mayor.” 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


89 


was  a man  to  defend  and  assist  him,  and  more  deter- 
mined in  risking  his  life  in  Don  Fernando’s  defence,  than 
many  in  whom  he  had  put  too  much  confidence,  and  that 
some  day  the  Prince  would  discover  his  mistake.  With 
these  and  other  false  assertions  Aguirre  pacified  his  Prince, 
who  could  not  by  words  show  that  he  felt  the  reverse ; for, 
taking  into  consideration  what  Aguirre  had  lately  done  and 
said,  and  the  little  respect  he  had  for  his  position,  he  was 
very  suspicious  of  what  might  happen  to  him ; this  feeling- 
increased  daily,  and  he  became  fearful  and  changed  in  his 
appearance  ; but  he  did  not  protect  his  person  with  more 
care,  nor  take  Aguirre’s  life,  nor  did  he  seek  to  rally  more 
friends  round  him  for  protection ; for  he  had  become  so 
timid  and  listless  that  for  the  care  of  his  own  life  he  took 
but  little  note. 

Aguirre,  on  the  other  hand,  was  guarded  at  every  point ; 
he  had  in  his  train,  day  and  night,  more  than  sixty  men 
well  armed  and  ready  to  commit  any  crime ; and  he  caused 
it  to  be  bruited  about  that  he  had  this  number  of  men  to 
guard  and  protect  Don  Fernando.  This  was  said  to  de- 
ceive those  who  suspected  that  Aguirre  meditated  the 
Prince’s  death. 

Gonzalo  Guiral  de  Fuentes,  Don  Fernando’s  captain,  and 
Alonzo  de  Villana  (both  of  whom  had  been  in  the  council 
when  Aguirre’s  death  was  determined  on),  seeing  what  had 
passed  between  Don  Fernando  and  Aguirre,  and  that  no 
good  would  result  to  one  or  the  other,  determined  to  join 
Aguirre’s  party,  which  was  the  strongest  in  followers  and 
arms  (for  it  is  the  fate  of  tyrants,  to  be  served  by  unfaithful 
ministers),  so  they  went  to  Aguirre,  and  recounted  to  him 
all  that  had  passed  in  the  council,  and  how  it  was  that 
he  was  not  a dead  man,  in  consequence  of  Alonzo  Montoya 
delaying  his  death  for  some  more  fitting  occasion.  With 
this  information  Aguirre  immediately  determined  within 
himself  (without  making  it  known  to  any  one)  to  kill  Don 

N 


90 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Fernando,  and  the  whole  of  the  council,  and  to  make  himself 
master  of  the  expedition.  He  sent  for  Don  Fernando  to  be 
present  at  a certain  council,  who  replied  (fearing  he  was 
to  be  killed  there)  that  the  present  was  not  the  time  for 
councils,  nor  to  call  him  to  them,  and  he  begged  to  be 
excused. 


CHAP.  XXII. 

1.  Aguirre  makes  his  arrangements  to  kill  the  Prince  Don  Fernando  and 
others. — 2.  Aguirre  and  his  companions  kill  two  captains , and  plan 
how  the  Prince  is  to  die. — 3.  They  go  in  the  morning  of  the  next 
day  to  kill  the  Prince. — 4.  Aguirre  kills  a priest , some  captains , and 
the  Prince  Don  Fernando. 

1.  Aguirre  was  rather  astonished  when  he  heard  of  the 
scheme  planned  by  the  council  for  his  assassination,  so  he 
determined  to  lose  no  time  in  murdering  those  who  had 
sentenced  him.  He  secretly  prepared  his  friends  for  action, 
but  only  made  known  to  two  of  them  his  intention  of  killing 
the  Prince,  for  these  two  had  promised  Aguirre  to  do  so 
two  days  before,  when  the  brigantines  should  be  on  the 
point  of  sailing. 

As  we  have  already  said,  the  island  on  which  they  were 
encamped  was  narrow.  In  one  part  of  it  Don  Fernando 
was  lodged,  Montoya  and  other  captains  were  at  the  other 
end,  whilst  Aguirre  and  his  friends  were  in  the  centre. 

The  first  thing  Aguirre  did  was  to  issue  an  order  that  all  the 
canoes,  above  and  below  the  brigantines,  should  be  brought 
up  to  them ; that  without  his  express  order  not  one  should 
be  used,  to  prevent  information  from  being  carried  from  one 
part  of  the  camp  to  the  other ; and  that  his  friends  should 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


91 


send  their  baggage  secretly  on  board  the  brigantines,  so  that, 
in  case  their  plans  became  known,  and  they  were  ordered 
to  be  arrested,  they  might  embark  and  set  sail. 

2.  The  night  arrived,  and  Aguirre  collected  his  followers 
together,  placing  guards  on  the  road  to  the  Prince’s  quar- 
ters (which  he  could  easily  do  as  the  island  was  so  narrow), 
so  that  no  one  could  pass  and  warn  him  of  what  was  going 
on.  All  his  friends  being  in  his  house,  he  told  them  it  was 
necessary  that  he  should  punish  certain  captains  and  soldiers 
who  had  rebelled  against  their  prince,  and  for  this  purpose 
he  prayed  they  would  accompany  and  assist  him,  as  they 
were  bound  to  do.  Having  equipped  and  armed  them,  they 
proceeded  with  him  direct  to  the  quarters  of  Montoya,  and 
that  of  the  admiral  Miguel  Bobedo,  in  the  upper  part  of  the 
island,  who  were  unprepared  for  Aguirre’s  plot.  Aguirre, 
with  his  host  of  ruffians,  entered  the  huts  of  both  of  his  vic- 
tims, killing  them  with  sword  and  lance,  unperceived  by  any 
one.  Hence  they  proceeded  on  their  way  to  do  the  same 
with  Don  Fernando,  before  any  one  could  inform  him  of 
what  was  meditated  against  him.  Aguirre  was  the  first  to 
inform  his  party  that  it  was  necessary  to  kill  other  captains 
and  soldiers  who  were  quartered  near  to  Don  Fernando, 
stating  who  were  to  die ; that  parties  of  ten  of  his  people 
were  to  rush  upon  each  individual,  naming  who  were  to  be 
the  murderers,  and  who  the  victims.  He  charged  them  to 
have  a care  in  fulfilling  his  orders  effectually,  and  promised 
to  be  in  the  thick  of  the  fight  with  them ; but  they  observed 
that  it  was  not  the  most  favourable  hour,  being  so  late  and 
the  night  so  dark,  and  that  in  the  affray  they  might  kill 
one  another. 

3.  Aguirre  considered  the  observation  was  not  ill-founded, 
so  he  delayed  proceeding  until  the  first  dawn  of  day,  in- 
creasing the  number  of  his  followers  with  soldiers  in  whom 
he  could  confide ; so  that  no  information  of  what  was  going 
on  might  transpire  in  the  lower  part  of  the  island.  But  he 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


92 

did  not  consider  it  prudent  to  remain  on  shore  during  the 
rest  of  the  night,  and  he  therefore  went  on  board  the  brigan- 
tines with  his  band.  They  were  very  watchful,  and  intended, 
in  case  the  Prince  should  suspect  what  they  were  about,  to 
cut  the  cables  of  the  brigantines,  and  go  down  the  river, 
leaving  the  Prince  and  the  rest  of  the  people  there  to  perish. 

The  day  began  to  dawn,  and  stillness  reigned  throughout 
the  camp  (for  the  two  deaths  they  had  already  committed 
had  not  been  discovered).  Aguirre  came  on  shore  with  his 
followers,  but  no  one  knew  that  they  were  about  to  kill  the 
Prince,  excepting  Juan  de  Aguirre  and  Martin  Perez,  the 
Sargento  mayor,  his  confidential  friends,  whom  he  had 
begged,  under  promise  of  great  gifts,  not  to  fail  in  killing 
Don  Fernando  de  Guzman.  A strong  guard  having  been 
left  on  board  the  brigantines,  Aguirre  advanced  with  his 
men  to  the  Prince’s  quarters,  collecting  all  the  soldiers  they 
met  on  the  road,  telling  them  they  were  going  to  chastise 
some  mutineers,  and  adding  that  they  should  be  ever  mind- 
ful of  their  Prince  and  lord,  to  reverence  him  and  to  see  that 
he  did  not  endanger  his  person ; and,  although  some  of  the 
mutineers  might  fly  to  his  side  for  protection,  to  be  most 
careful  not  to  harm  the  Prince,  for  it  was  probable,  as  his 
Excellency  was  of  so  kind  a disposition  (being  ignorant  of 
the  treason  against  his  person  on  the  part  of  the  captains 
they  were  going  to  kill),  that  he  might  try  to  save  them,  but 
they  were  not  to  be  left  alive. 

4.  Aguirre,  having  fully  instructed  his  band,  and  approach- 
ing the  hut  of  Padre  Alonso  Henao  (who  had  said  the  mass,  and 
had  taken  the  oaths  of  rebellion  against  the  king),  commenced 
his  butchery  by  sacrilegiously  taking  the  life  of  the  priest,  by 
the  sword.  Some  said  that  this  deed  was  accidental,  and  that 
Aguirre  did  not  kill  him,  but  a soldier  called  Alonzo  Navarro. 
Whoever  committed  the  act,  the  priest  was  murdered. 
They  then  proceeded  to  the  Prince’s  quarters,  and  found 
him  on  his  couch,  quite  unprepared  to  be  hurried  out  of  the 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


93 

world.  Don  Fernando  arose,  on  hearing  the  noise  made  by 
the  entry  of  the  soldiers,  and,  on  seeing  Lope  de  Aguirre 
amongst  them,  said,  “ What  is  all  this,  my  father  ?”  for  this 
was  the  way  the  Prince  generally  addressed  Aguirre,  who 
replied,  “ Do  not  he  alarmed,  your  Excellency,”  and,  pass- 
ing onwards  with  some  followers,  went  to  where  Captain 
Miguel  Serrano,  Duarte,  and  Baltasar  Cortes  Cano  were, 
killing  them  with  swords,  lances,  and  arquebuzes. 

Martin  Perez  and  Juan  de  Aguirre  had  not  forgotten 
Aguirre’s  instructions,  and,  perceiving  that  the  opportunity 
had  arrived  by  reason  of  the  confusion  in  the  house,  and  steel- 
ing their  hearts  for  the  act,  they  approached  Don  Fernando, 
and  fired  their  arquebuses  at  him.  They  afterwards  attacked 
him  with  their  swords,  and  thus  he  fell  dead  at  their  feet, 
bringing  his  rebellion  to  an  end,  a fate  which  he  might  have 
averted  had  he  taken  proper  precautions.  He  was  scarcely 
twenty-six  years  of  age,  of  good  stature,  well  formed  and 
strong  of  limb,  with  the  manners  of  a gentleman,  fine  face 
and  beard,  slow  to  action,  more  kind  than  otherwise,  and 
born  in  the  city  of  Seville. 


CHAP.  XXIII. 

1.  Aguirre  explains  the  cause  of  the  death  of  the  governor  and  the  others 
to  the  camp , and  calls  his  soldiers  the  “ Maranones.” — 2.  He  changes 
the  various  offices  in  the  army , giving  them  to  his  friends. — 3.  They 
leave  the  town  of  the  “ Butchery,”  and  sail  through  large  provinces. 
— 4.  After  navigating  for  ticelve  days , they  come  to  a village. 

1.  The  bloody  work  being  over,  and  the  day  advancing, 
Lope  de  Aguirre  called  the  people  together  in  an  open 
place,  from  whence  he  could  be  heard  by  all.  He  was 
armed  from  head  to  foot,  and  surrounded  by  eighty  of  his 


94 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


best  fighting  friends,  fully  armed.  He  then  gave  an  account 
of  the  late  severity,  adding  that  they  ought  not  to  be  sur- 
prised, nor  he  tumultuous  on  account  of  the  deaths  they 
had  witnessed,  because  such  were  the  natural  consequences 
brought  on  by  wars,  and  that  war  could  not  be  called  by  that 
name  if  such  acts  did  not  take  place  ; that  their  Prince, 
and  the  rest  who  had  fallen,  had  been  thus  treated,  because 
they  did  not  know  how  to  govern,  nor  to  direct  the  expedi- 
tion to  the  favourable  end  they  all  desired  ; that  for  the 
safety  of  the  army,  the  death  of  Don  Fernando  was  most 
necessary  ; for  had  he  been  allowed  to  live,  they  would  all 
have  perished  through  his  bad  government,  which  fact  must 
be  so  manifest  to  all,  that  he  would  not  trouble  them  further 
on  the  matter,  but  that  henceforth  they  should  consider  him 
as  their  friend  and  companion,  and  be  well  assured  that  for 
the  future,  the  war  would  be  prosecuted  to  the  satisfaction 
of  all ; that  they  would  not  be  sorry  for  having  chosen  him 
for  their  General,  for  that  they  could  scarcely  conceive  the 
extent  of  the  desire  he  felt  to  administer  to  their  pleasure 
and  contentment.  He  thus  ended  his  speech,  and  remained 
with  the  title  of  General ; although  some  say  that  he  was 
not  called  General,  but  the  “ Powerful  Chief,”  and  his  men 
Maranohes  (a  name  they  gave  themselves),  which  for  days 
past  they  had  had  the  idea  of  taking,  owing  to  the  entangle- 
ments and  plots  ( maranas ) that  daily  occurred  in  that  expe- 
dition, with  so  much  danger  to  all,  as  we  have  seen  ; and 
from  this  came  the  name  of  the  river  Marahon,  without  there 
being  any  other  reason  to  call  it  so.  We  have  observed  that 
each  province  on  the  margins  of  the  rivers  that  entered  the 
Marahon  had  their  various  names.  It  has  been  said  that  a 
small  branch  of  this  river  was  called  Marahon,  from  which 
the  whole  river  took  its  name.  But  the  truth  is  as  we  have 
said,  and  the  name  was  never  heard  before,  although  many 
Spaniards  had  navigated  near  to  its  mouths  (in  the  Atlantic), 
and  the  Captain  Francisco  de  Orellana  had  descended  it,  and 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


95 


given  it  the  name  of  Amazonas,  on  account  of  having  met 
with  women,  who  fought  against  him  ; and  the  river  took 
that  name  also.1 

2.  Aguirre  was  now  anxious  to  commence  the  exercise  of 
his  supreme  power  and  office,  as  General  over  the  expedi- 
tion (which  he  had  taken  by  his  own  will,  and  without  other 
right  than  that  obtained  by  the  murders  which  he  had  com- 
mitted). Pie  began  by  giving  new  posts  to  those  particular 
friends  who  had  been  most  ready  to  second  his  designs.  To 
Martin  Perez,  who  had  been  his  sergeant,  and  one  of  the 
murderers  of  Don  Fernando,  he  gave  the  post  of  maestro  del 
campo ; one  Juan  Lopez  (a  ship’s  caulker)  was  appointed 
admiral;  Juan  Gonzalo  (a  carpenter)  sargento  mayor.  rPhe 
commander,  Juan  de  Guevara,  was  deprived  of  his  office  of 
captain,  given  to  him  by  the  Prince,  and  promised  that,  if 
all  arrived  safely  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  he  should  be  given 
twenty  thousand  dollars  and  sent  to  Spain,  for  Aguirre  was 
well  aware  that  the  commander  was  not  cut  out  for  a soldier. 

1 Velasco  has  an  interesting  chapter  on  the  river  Maranon  (Hist,  of 
Quito,  1789,  i,  16.)  He  observes  that  the  name  of  the  first  Spaniard  who 
saw  the  river  was  Maranon  ; and  that  he  exclaimed  on  beholding  the  vast 
expanse  of  waters,  “ Hie  mare  an  non  “ Maranon ” is  in  reality  de- 
rived from  the  Spanish  word  Marana,  one  of  the  meanings  of  which,  is 
a place  rendered  impassable  by  brambles  and  briers  ; and  such  impedi- 
ments would  have  been  encountered  by  the  first  explorers  of  the  river. 
In  this  chapter,  however,  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  the  river  took  its 
name  of  Maranon  from  the  “ Maranas,”  or  entanglements  and  plots  which 
daily  occurred  in  Aguirre’s  expedition.  Orellana  entered  this  great  river 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Napo,  and  it  should  retain  his  name  of  “Ama- 
zonas” from  that  point  to  the  Atlantic  ; while  the  name  of  “ Maranon ” 
may  justly  be  given  to  the  river  from  its  source  in  the  lake  of  Lauri- 
oche  in  Peru,  to  its  junction  with  the  Napo. 

Manuel  Rodriguez  says,  u A vista  de  los  enredos  y maranas  que  pas- 
saron,  andando  por  aquel  rio,  y sus  vueltas,  le  llamaron  Rio  de  Maranas, 
y por  significarlas  grandes,  passd  a llamarse  Maranon.  Y aun  solo  por 
si,  pudieron  darle  el  nombre,  por  sus  muehas  vueltas  entre  islas,  y montes, 
que  le  descaminan  ; y por  sus  brazos,  saltos,  y despenos,  llamandole 
Maranon  de  aguas,  enredo  y laberinto  confusode  corrientes.” — Maranon 
y Amazonas,  lib.  i,  cap.  v. 


96 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


The  office  of  conducted  was  given  to  Diego  de  Trujello, 
who  had  been  alferez  to  Aguirre ; Diego  Tirado  was  made 
captain  of  horse ; some  say  that  he  was  obliged  to  accept 
the  post,  or  that  otherwise  he  would  have  been  killed,  al- 
though I think  it  was  not  so,  for  we  shall  see  what  he  did 
afterwards.  Aguirre  made  Nicolas  de  Susaya  his  captain  of 
the  guard.  He  was  a Biscayan,  and  a very  little  mean 
fellow,  but  he  was  soon  removed.  The  staff  of  office  of 
alguazil  mayor  of  the  camp  he  gave  to  Carrion,  a mestizo,  the 
husband  of  an  Indian  woman  in  Piru,  which  staff  was  taken 
from  Juan  Lopez  Carreto  ; but  in  order  not  to  change  all 
the  captains  and  old  officers  (as  also  to  please  some  of  his 
friends,  who  begged  him  not  to  do  so),  he  left  Sancho  Pizarro 
and  Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas,  in  the  posts  given  to  them  by 
Don  Fernando. 

3.  Aguirre  presently  considered  how  he  could  best  pre- 
vent any  difficulties  that  might  occur  (being  so  crafty  and 
wicked  a man,  he  judged  the  world  by  himself),  so  he  issued 
a proclamation,  under  pain  of  death,  that  henceforward  no 
one  should  speak  in  private  with  his  companions,  that  the 
soldiers  should  not  go  about  in  bodies,  and  that,  when  in  his 
presence,  no  man  should  put  his  hand  to  his  sword  or  other 
arms. 

Not  considering  himself  quite  safe,  even  with  these  severe 
orders,  he  thought  he  and  his  friends  would  be  better  in  the 
brigantines  than  on  shore,  (during  the  two  days  they  were 
detained  in  that  place,  after  the  death  of  Don  Fernando)  ; 
so  they  embarked,  and  when  there  was  any  necessity  for 
their  coming  on  shore,  it  was  done  with  such  care  and 
caution,  and  so  many  of  them  came  well  armed,  that 
even  if  the  others  had  sought  to  molest  them,  they  would 
not  have  succeeded,  seeing  that  they  had  but  few  arms,  and 
that  those  they  had  were  very  inferior,  (for  as  we  have  said, 

1 Conducto  or  Conductor — usher,  or  one  whose  business  it  is  to  intro- 
duce ambassadors. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


97 


Aguirre  had  for  some  time  past  appropriated  the  best,  for 
himself,  and  his  friends)  and  would  have  been  of  little  use. 

After  these  two  days,  having  embarked  all  the  people  in 
the  two  brigantines  and  some  canoes,  he  left  the  town  of  the 

Butchery,”  (for  so  they  called  it),  and  directed  his  course 
to  the  left,  by  a branch  of  the  river,  his  intention  being  not 
to  sight  any  village  or  people  on  the  right  side,  having  re- 
ceived information  that  the  Omaguas  dwelt  in  that  direction; 
but,  navigating  by  this  and  other  branches  coming  from  the 
west,  they  soon  saw  some  low  mountains  to  the  east,  with 
open  savannahs,  whence  they  discerned,  during  the  day,  much 
smoke,  and  at  night  many  fires,  a sure  sign  that  they  were 
near  a large  village ; but  as  no  one  was  allowed  to  make  any 
observation,  or  talk  about  what  they  saw  under  pain  of  death, 
they  could  only  look  and  be  silent.1  The  Brazilian  Indian 
guides  said  clearly  that  those  were  the  lands  and  people  of 
the  Omaguas  whom  they  were  in  search  of,  so,  to  stop  any  in- 
vestigation on  this  head,  Aguirre  immediately  issued  an  order, 
under  pain  of  death,  that  no  one  should  talk  with  the  Bra- 
zilian guides,  or  speak  of  the  lands  of  the  Omaguas. 

4.  They  discovered  other  bare-looking  low  mountains  on 
the  left  hand,  which  were  nearly  opposite  to  those  on  the 
right,  but  they  did  not  appear  so  populous.  These  two 
ranges  caused  the  river  to  be  somewhat  narrower,  but  not  so 
much  so  as  to  prevent  it  from  being  very  wide  even  here. 

For  eight  days  and  seven  nights  the  Marahones  were  navi- 
gating, going  always  to  the  left,  and  passing  many  islands, 
peopled  by  naked  Indians  with  bows  and  arrows.  They 
were  the  first  they  had  seen  on  the  river,  who  had  piraguas 
(large  boats).  They  landed  at  one  of  the  villages  in  search 
of  provisions,  where  they  found  a great  number  of  iguanas 
in  the  huts,  tied  by  the  neck,  ready  to  be  eaten. 

1 Aguirre  appears  to  have  been  working  his  way  up  the  Rio  Negro, 
in  the  direction  of  the  Cassiquiari  Canal,  which  connects  it  with  the 
Orinoco. 


O 


98 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


At  length  they  came  near  a large  Indian  settlement*  on 
the  right*  situated  on  a very  high  cliff*  at  sight  of  which 
Aguirre  sent  thirty  armed  men  in  canoes  and  piraguas,  with 
orders  to  lay  hands  on  some  of  the  Indians*  who  did  not  fly 
from  the  Spaniards*  but  waited*  looking  at  them  from  the 
cliff*  apparently  with  peaceful  intentions.  The  soldiers  gave 
them  to  understand  that  they  were  friendly  also ; hut*  as  the 
latter  were  so  used  to  the  shedding  of  human  blood*  parti- 
cularly that  of  the  natives*  and  in  this  case  much  against 
their  own  interests*  they  began  to  fire  their  muskets, 
wounding  some  of  the  Indians*  and  causing  the  rest  to  fly, 
leaving  all  they  had  in  their  huts. 

The  soldiers  went  after  the  Indians*  but  could  only  catch 
a man  and  a woman. 

Wishing  to  ascertain  whether  the  plant  they  rubbed  on 
their  arrows  was  poisonous*  one  Juan  Gonzales  Serrato  took 
one  of  the  arrows  from  an  Indian*  and  pricked  him  in  the 
leg  with  it,  drawing  blood.  On  the  following  day  the  Indian 
died*  so  it  was  seen  that  the  poison  used  here  was  most 
powerful. 

The  brigantines  now  came  to  the  village*  where  the 
Spaniards  disembarked*  plundering  the  Indian  huts  of  pro- 
visions and  other  things.  The  Indians*  having  placed  their 
wives  and  children  in  safety,  appeared  occasionally  in  the 
distance*  on  land*  and  on  the  river  in  their  canoes  and 
piraguas*  but  they  did  not  attack  the  Spaniards. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


99 


CHAP.  XXIV. 

1.  They  catch  an  Indian , and  send  him  to  tell  the  others  that  they 
desire  to  be  at  peace  with  them. — 2.  Aguirre  kills  three  soldiers , 
whilst  they  are  putting  the  brigantines  in  order. — 3.  He  still  has 
tyrannical  fears,  although  he  has  killed  so  many  men. — 4.  The  Bra- 
zilian Indian  guides  escape  from  him. 

1.  They  were  anxious  to  lay  hands  on  one  of  the  Indians 
who  were  in  sight,  which  they  did ; and  Aguirre  (giving 
him  some  hatchets  and  other  things)  made  him  understand 
by  signs  that  he  was  to  go  to  his  companions,  and  tell  them 
to  come  into  the  camp,  and  that  no  harm  should  come  to 
them.  So  the  Indian  went,  and  shortly  afterwards  they  sent 
two  messengers,  one  was  lame  in  the  foot,  the  other  in  the 
hand,  and  his  body  bent  on  one  side ; and  these,  by  signs, 
made  known  that  the  whole  of  the  Indians  would  come  in, 
and  be  friends. 

But  Aguirre’s  thoughts  ran  more  upon  Piru,  than  upon 
making  peace  with  these  Indians  ; so  he  did  not  think  it 
worthwhile  to  await  their  coming,  or  else  he  considered  that 
they  had  not  been  prudent  in  sending  the  two  Indians  away, 
who  would  report  what  they  had  seen,  and  the  natives  in 
large  numbers  might  come  and  attack  them ; for  all  around 
was  a high  plain  free  from  marshes,  being  an  open  savanna, 
surrounded  by  a forest  of  cork-trees  (alcornocales  claros). 

The  Indians  here  are  naked,  and  they  use  the  bow  and  arrow 
with  dexterity.  They  are  Caribs,  and  voracious  for  human 
flesh,  and  are  called  the  Arnaquinas.1  They  have  temples 
for  sacrifice,  and  worship  the  sun  and  moon,  as  the  Span- 

1 Arnaquinas.  These  Indians  may  have  been  the  Arekainas  of  Wal- 
lace, p.  508  ; a tribe  on  the  Rio  Negro,  and  on  the  upper  waters  of  some 
of  its  tributaries  ; who  make  war  against  other  tribes,  as  Padre  Simon 
says,  to  obtain  prisoners  for  food.  Yon  Spix  mentions  a tribe  called 
Arequenas , on  the  Putumayu  (probably  the  same),  Spix  und  Martius , 
iii,  p.  1136.  These  Indians,  like  their  neighbours  the  TJaupes,  have 
sorcerers,  but  do  not  believe  in  a God. 


100 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


iards  discovered,  by  what  they  saw  at  the  doors  of  their 
sanctuaries  ; for  on  one  side,  there  was  a large  plank  on 
which  was  cut  the  figure  of  the  sun  and  that  of  a man.  From 
this  it  was  understood  that  they  sacrificed  men.  On  the 
other  side  was  another  plank,  with  the  moon  and  a female 
engraved  on  it,  and  here  they  sacrificed  women.  Both  these 
spots  were  very  full  of  blood,  which,  doubtless,  was  human 
(although  this  could  not  be  distinctly  learnt  from  the  In- 
dians, as  the  Spaniards  were  ignorant  of  their  language). 

2.  The  Indian  houses  were  in  confusion;  in  one  a piece  of 
the  guard  of  a sword  was  found,  in  others  nails,  and  in  others 
little  things  made  of  iron.  Their  food  was  the  ordinary 
food  of  the  Indians,  viz.,  maize,  which  was  found  in  quanti- 
ties in  their  houses  ; and  many  roots  of  name  (yam),  and 
yucas  were  in  the  ground,  from  which  they  made  cas- 
sava. There  was  much  fish  in  the  river,  and  plenty  of  fruit 
on  land. 

Already  at  this  spot,  on  the  river  (in  consequence  of  the 
great  distance  they  had  navigated,  and  because  the  water  was 
seen  to  ebb  and  flow,  and  by  other  signs),  the  pilots  and  others 
conjectured  they  were  not  far  from  the  sea,  so  Aguirre 
determined  to  ship  the  masts  of  the  brigantines,  and  to  rig 
them,  particularly  as  there  was  plenty  of  provisions  here,  to 
last  them  for  the  time  they  were  occupied  about  the  vessels. 
There  were  also  large  quantities  of  cabuyas,  Agues,  and 
cacuyza,  from  which  they  made  rope  ;l  also  large  spars  for 
masts,  jars  of  a good  earth  for  holding  water,  much  cassava, 
and  other  things. 

They  hurried  affairs  on,  making  sails  of  some  cotton 
mantles  and  sheets  they  collected  from  amongst  themselves, 
and  they  were  ready  in  twelve  days,  which  appeared  to 
Aguirre  as  so  much  lost  time,  for  he  had  not  shed  any  blood; 
and  that  he  might  not  forget  how  to  do  it  (for  his  office  was 
that  of  a murderer),  he  laid  a snare  for  a soldier  named 
1 Varieties  of  the  Agave  Americana. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


101 


Monteverde,  saying  he  thought  it  very  shameful  in  him  to  be 
so  lukewarm  in  warlike  affairs,  and  that  he  was  of  no  use  to 
him.  One  night  he  caused  him  to  be  strangled,  with  an  in- 
scription placed  on  his  body  as  follows,  “ amotinadorcillo,” 
a poor  little  mutineer.  Some,  to  put  a gloss  over  what 
Aguirre  had  done,  justified  the  death  of  Monteverde,  because 
he  was  a Lutheran;  but  let  this  be  as  it  may,  he  did  not  kill 
him  from  zeal  for  the  Catholic  faith  (about  which  he  did  not 
care),  but  because  he  thought  he  was  not  sufficiently  devoted 
to  him.  Because  Aguirre’s  wickedness  was  increasing,  or 
because  he  wished  Monteverde  to  have  a companion,  he 
killed  Juan  de  Cabanas  (one  of  the  three  already  alluded  to, 
who  would  not  follow  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  or  sign 
anything  against  the  King  of  Spain),  because  Aguirre  con- 
sidered he  ought  not  to  continue  in  such  an  opinion,  although 
he  had  been  permitted  to  act  as  he  did.  Aguirre  then 
billed  Captain  Diego  de  Trujillo  and  Juan  Gonzales,  then 
Sargento  Mayor,  to  whom  he  had  given  these  posts  after 
Don  Fernando’s  death ; and,  that  no  one  might  say  that  they 
had  been  executed  without  cause,  he  had  it  reported  that 
these  men  wanted  to  mutiny  and  kill  him  : however,  the 
truth  was  that  he  had  got  rid  of  them  out  of  this  life  because 
they  were  looked  upon  as  good  and  kind  men,  and  because 
many  came  about  them  as  friends.  Aguirre  feared  and  be- 
lieved that  at  some  time  or  other  this  party  would  kill  him 
and  his  band. 

3.  He  soon  gave  the  offices  of  the  dead  men  to  others : 
that  of  captain  to  one  Cristoval  Garcia,  a caulker ; that  of 
serjeant  to  one  Juan  Tello.  So  many  were  the  fears  that 
disturbed  the  wicked  conscience  of  Aguirre,  although  he  had 
killed  those  whom  he  in  any  way  feared,  that  he  never  felt 
himself  secure  from  the  survivors  : so,  not  believing  himself 
safe,  either  by  day  or  night,  on  land,  during  the  greater 
portion  of  the  twelve  days  he  and  his  friends  lived  on  board 
one  of  the  brigantines,  and  Martin  Perez  on  board  the 


102 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


other,  not  allowing  any  of  the  soldiers,  of  whom  he  had  the 
least  suspicion,  to  enter  them. 

There  were  two  soldiers — one  called  Madrigal,  the  other 
J uan  Lopez  Serrato.  The  latter  had  been  alguazil  mayor  to 
Don  Fernando ; they  were  on  unfriendly  terms  in  conse- 
quence of  some  affront  Serrato  had  put  on  Madrigal,  who 
wished  to  have  satisfaction,  and  with  Aguirre’s  permission, 
watching  an  opportunity,  he,  one  day,  and  in  Aguirre’s 
presence,  came  behind  Serrato,  and  with  a lance  wounded 
him  dangerously.  Aguirre  pretended  that  he  would  have 
him  arrested  and  punished  for  this  ; true  he  was  arrested, 
but  never  punished,  because  Serrato  got  the  better  of  his 
wounds;  but  Aguirre  did  not  think  it  fit  that  Serrato  should 
be  cured,  and  have  his  life  saved,  so  he  commanded  those 
who  were  attending  on  him  to  put  poison  into  his  wounds. 
The  surgeons  did  this,  so  that  what  they  put  into  the  wounds 
soon  killed  him.  * 

After  some  days,  and  when  provisions  had  been  taken  in, 
the  Brazilian  Indian  guides,  who  had  come  with  the  expe- 
dition from  Piru,  seeing  that  they  had  missed  the  opportu- 
nity of  entering  the  country  of  the  Omaguas,  ran  away  and 
fled  one  night ; and  it  was  presumed  that  their  country  was 
not  far  off,  otherwise  they  would  not  have  fled,  because  they 
would  have  had  to  enter  the  country  of  the  Cannibals  (the 
Arnaquinas),  already  mentioned. 

4.  As  soon  as  the  brigantines  were  ready,  and  stored  with 
maize,  cassava,  and  water, — Aguirre  embarked  his  people, 
and,  before  they  set  sail,  he  disarmed  all  the  soldiers  he  had 
any  suspicion  of,  bound  and  put  them  into  confinement  in  the 
fore  part  of  the  vessels,  ordering  that  no  one  should  go  near 
them,  excepting  his  tried  friends.  He  did  the  same  with  the 
suspected  soldiers  who  were  in  the  other  brigantine,  in  which 
was  his  maestro  del  campo,  Martin  Perez. 

This  being  done  they  set  sail;  and  as  the  magnitude  of  the 
river  was  increasing,  the  winds  began  to  show  their  power. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


103 


They  had  only  been  out  a short  time,  when  Aguirre  began 
to  overflow  with  cruelty.  In  order  not  to  forget  his  habits, 
he  recurred  to  them  (without  waiting  for  any  causes  what- 
ever), and  determined  to  kill  the  commander,  Juan  de  Gue- 
vara, ordering  one  Anton  Llamoso,  his  serjeant,  to  do  the 
deed.  Llamoso  went  to  Guevara  (who  was  on  board,  and  un- 
prepared thus  to  die),  and  began  to  wound  him  with  an  old 
broken  sword.  Guevara  prayed  that  he  would  not  kill  him 
so  cruelly,  and  with  such  a sword,  when  the  serjeant  took 
Guevara’s  dagger,  giving  him  many  stabs,  and,  before  he 
was  dead,  he  threw  him  into  the  river,  where,  surrounded 
by  the  drowning  waves,  and  the  agonies  of  death,  he  was 
heard  to  say,  “ confession,  confession.”  Aguirre  gave  out 
that  he  had  suffered  for  having  been  concerned  in  the 
mutiny  of  Diego  de  Villanueva  and  Juan  Gonzales,  who  had 
been  executed  at  the  last  village  they  were  at,  called  by 
.them  that  of  the  Xarcia  (Village  of  Ropes). 

Aguirre  was  so  overjoyed  at  this  cruel  death  of  the 
comendador,  that,  glorying  in  his  infernal  wickedness,  he 
came  alongside  the  other  brigantine,  in  which  was  his 
maestro  del  campo,  and  told  him  of  it,  laughing  most  heartily. 
Both  enjoyed  the  death  of  Guevara  to  their  hearts’ 
content. 


CHAP.  XXV. 

1.  Going  down  the  river , they  fall  in  with  some  strongly  built  houses , 
where  they  find  cakes  of  salt. — 2.  During  the  voyage  they  pass  many 
islands  ; and,  on  one  of  them  they  leave  the  greater  number  of  Indian 
servants , whom  they  had  brought  with  them. — 3.  They  continue  the 
voyage  under  many  difficulties.  For  a trifling  affair  Aguirre  has  two 
Spaniards  strangled. — 4.  He  loses  a piragua , with  three  Spaniards 
and,  some  Indians ; and  others  are  drowned , gathering  shell-fish. 

1.  After  six  days  sailing,  from  the  village  of  the  Xarcia, 


104 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


they  came  to  some  strong  houses,  on  the  margin  of  the  river, 
built  by  the  Indians,  on  the  tops  of  high  timbers,  with  their 
barbacoas 1 above,  and  surrounded  below  with  strong  planks 
of  palm  wood,  with  loopholes  for  shooting  out  their  arrows. 
The  traitor  Aguirre  sent  one  of  his  captains,  with  some  sol- 
diers, to  one  of  these  buildings,  but  the  Indians  made  so 
good  a show  of  resistance,  that,  without  receiving  any  harm 
from  the  arquebuses,  they  dangerously  wounded  four  Span- 
iards, and  made  the  rest  retreat.  The  Spaniards  then  tried 
to  get  to  the  rear  of  the  building  by  a creek,  but,  having  got 
to  the  spot,  they  found  it  empty,  for  the  Indians  had  fled. 
They  did  not  find  any  provisions,  either  in  this  house  or  the 
others,  nor  any  signs  of  cultivation  around  them ; so  it  was 
presumed  that  the  Indians  lived  on  fish,  and  what  they  pro- 
cured by  bartering  these  fish  with  other  Indians.  They  only 
found  some  salt  in  cakes,  prepared  by  boiling.  They  had 
not  met  with  any  salt  before  on  this  river,  neither  did  the 
Indians  (they  had  seen)  know  what  it  was.2 

From  the  Caperuzas  to  this  point,  according  to  the  opinion 
of  all,  they  had  n avigated  one  thousand  three  hundred  leagues, 
including  the  various  bends  in  the  river.  The  expedition 
stayed  here  three  days,  making  the  necessary  arrangements 
for  sea,  when  they  should  get  out  of  the  river. 

Afterwards,  there  appeared  on  the  river  more  than  a 
hundred  canoes  and  piraguas,  with  a multitude  of  armed 
Indians.  The  Spaniards  prepared  to  receive  them,  and 
defend  themselves,  thinking  the  Indians  intended  to 
attack  them  when  they  were  out  of  the  river ; but  nothing 
of  the  sort  took  place,  for  the  brigantines  had  so  much  the 
advantage  of  the  canoes  and  piraguas,  that  the  Indians 
became  terrified,  and  rapidly  disappeared,  hiding  themselves 
as  they  best  could,  or  running  away. 

1 This  must  mean  the  sleeping  places  of  the  Indians. 

2 Aguirre  must  have  been  in  the  head  waters  of  the  Orinoco,  when  he 
found  this  salt. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


105 


2.  They  continued  their  voyage,  and  got  amongst  a large 
number  of  islands,  which  confused  them.  They  now  had  to 
row,  particularly  as  the  coming  in  of  the  tide  made  the 
waters  contrary  for  them ; and  when  the  tide  fell,  which  it 
did  so  strongly  that  they  did  not  know  where  they  were 
going  on  that  waste  of  waters,  the  pilots  were  confused, 
having  no  knowledge  of  the  river  and  its  tides.  Before 
them  they  saw  some  points  of  land  on  the  continent,  or 
on  rather  high  islands,  and  Aguirre  sent  certain  pilots 
in  piraguas  to  see  how  they  were  to  proceed  with 
their  navigation ; and  having  done  so,  they  became  the 
more  puzzled  in  consequence  of  the  difference  of  opinion 
amongst  them  as  to  which  course  they  ought  to  take : so 
they  at  last  determined  to  proceed  as  God  pleased  to  let 
them,  until  they  came  to  a small  Indian  village  on  the  cliffs 
of  the  river,  on  one  of  the  islands,  whence  the  natives  came 
peacefully  to  barter  food  with  them.  The  Indians  were 
naked,  but  on  the  soles  of  their  feet  they  had  pieces  of  deer 
skin,  fastened  like  the  sandals  worn  in  Piru,  and  as  I have 
seen  worn  in  the  provinces  of  the  government  of  Venezuela. 
Their  hair  was  cut  in  round  lines,  beginning  from  the 
top. 

Here  Aguirre  committed  one  of  his  greatest  cruelties ; for 
he  left  amongst  these  barbarous  and  sanguinary  Indians 
those  male  and  female  natives  who  had  become  Christians, 
(some  of  whom  they  had  brought  from  Piru,  and  others  from 
the  river,)  saying  there  was  no  room  for  them  in  the  brigan- 
tines, and  that  they  were  a burden  to  him,  as  he  had  but 
little  food  for  so  many.  It  was  certain  that  these  poor 
creatures  would  soon  perish  by  the  hands  of  the  other 
Indians,  or  by  the  maladies  of  this  humid  and  unhealthy 
country. 

3.  The  abandonment  of  these  Indians,  who  served  the 
Spaniards,  was  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  two  Spaniards 
named  Pedro  Guiterrez  and  Diego  Palomo ; for,  as  they 

p 


106 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


were  conversing  together,  they  were  heard  to  say,  that  it 
appeared  that  as  their  servants  were  left  here,  it  would  be 
as  well  to  do  at  once  what  had  to  be  done.  This  was  over- 
heard by  a negro,  who  told  it  to  Aguirre,  and  he  took  it  to 
he  sufficient  cause  for  executing  the  two  Spaniards,  who 
were,  therefore,  ordered  to  be  strangled.  Diego  Palomo 
begged  hard  that  he  might  be  left  amongst  the  Indians  to 
teach  them  to  be  Christians,  but  this  was  not  what  Aguirre 
wanted;  religion  might  be  taught  by  those  whose  profession 
it  was,  but  he  did  not  care  to  do  good  to  any  one. 

They  left  this  village,  and  a few  leagues  further  on  they 
found  themselves  near  to  the  mouth  of  the  river,  which  is 
nearly  eighty  leagues  wide.  Here  they  were  in  great 
danger,  by  reason  of  the  fearful  weather,  and  were  a 
thousand  times  being  nearly  lost.  On  the  left  hand  side, 
which  is  to  the  west,  towards  the  Cordillera,55  they  saw 
that  the  land  was  well  peopled,  from  the  quantity  of  smoke 
they  observed ; but  they  did  not  visit  the  people,  that  not 
being  their  intention,  and  because  there  were  very  many 
shoals,  which  the  brigantines  often  touched ; and  if  the 
shoals  had  not  been  of  soft  sand,  the  vessels  would  have 
been  knocked  to  pieces. 

4.  It  happened  in  these  waters  that  three  Spaniards  and 
some  Indians  went  out  in  a piragua,  when  the  (macareo) 
high  waves  of  the  sea  or  of  the  river  upset  the  boat  with 
such  violence  that  the  brigantines  could  not  go  to  their 
assistance  ; and  they  were  driven  so  far  away,  that  they 
were  soon  lost  sight  of,  and  it  was  not  known  whether  they 
were  drowned,  or  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  natives. 

It  sometimes  happened,  that  when  the  tide  was  out, 
islands  were  discovered,  when  the  Indians  they  had  in  their 
service,  and  who  were  famishing  with  hunger,  would  go  in 
canoes  to  look  for  shell-fish.  Busy  in  this  search,  the  tide 
would  set  in  with  such  velocity,  and  with  such  huge  rollers, 

? In  that  direction  was  the  Sierras  of  Coussaris  and  Tumucucuraque. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


107 


that  they  found  it  impossible  to  return  to  the  vessels,  and 
perished  miserably.  With  these  and  other  innumerable 
troubles,  they  sailed  into  the  Sea  of  the  North,  on  the  1st 
of  July  of  the  year  1561. 


CHAP.  XXVI. 

1.  The  first  Spaniard  who  sailed  out  of  the  mouth  of  this  river , was 
Captain  Francisco  de  Orellana.  Its  banks  are  not  well  peopled. — ■ 
2.  Character , climate , and  people  of  this  river , from  its  sources  to 
where  it  enters  the  sea. — 3.  There  are  more  than  two  thousand  islands 
near  to  the  mouths  of  the  river. — 4.  Lope  de  Aguirre,  finding  himself 
out  at  sea,  sails  for  the  Island  of  Margarita,  where  he  arrives  and 
lands , having  first  killed  two  soldiers  in  the  brigantine. 

Previous  to  the  voyage  of  the  Maranones  down  this  river, 
its  first  navigator  was  Captain  Francisco  de  Orellana,  who 
came  from  the  river  Canela  (which,  as  we  have  said,  rises  in 
the  provinces  at  the  back  of  Quito).  Orellana  having  met, 
during  his  voyage,  with  women  of  fair  stature,  who  defended 
themselves  from  him  and  his  soldiers,  and  opposed  his 
advance,  he  gave  them  the  name  of  Amazons,  because  they 
were  like  similar  women  of  Scythia,  who  lived  on  the  banks 
of  the  great  river  Tanais,  whence  they  first  moved  to 
another  river  called  Thermodon,  and  conquered  by  their 
arms  the  greater  portion  of  Asia.  These  Amazons  had  the 
great  Penthesilea  for  their  queen  and  commander,  and  they 
are  mentioned  by  Zachary  Lilio,  w*ho  says  that  they  burnt 
the  right  breast  off,  that  it  might  not  hinder  them  in  the 
management  of  arms,  for  the  chase,  or  in  war.  Orellana  had 
some  reason  for  calling  the  women  he  met  with  Amazons,  on 
account  of  their  having  fought  against  the  Spaniards ; yet  in 
many  provinces  of  these  Indies,  women  have  done  the  same  : 
nor  do  we  see  why  this  river  should  be  called  the  Amazons 


108 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


only  on  account  of  this  occurrence.  The  most  prevalent 
custom  is  to  call  it  Maranon,  as  before  stated.  Its  magni- 
tude is  such  as  to  entitle  it  to  the  name  of  the  gulf  of  sweet 
water,  for,  independent  of  its  great  size  at  its  mouth,  it,  at 
times,  when  it  rises,  covers  a hundred  leagues  of  land  with 
so  much  water  that  canoes  and  piraguas  sail  over  the  in- 
undated land. 

The  banks  of  the  river  are  not  well  peopled,  and  it  is  a 
matter  of  wonder  how  the  Indians  live,  by  reason  of  the 
myriads  of  mosquitos,  which  they  call  noisy  zancudos,  and 
it  appears  that  nature  has  created  these  animals  to  punish 
and  torment  sinful  man. 

2.  From  the  time  the  expedition  left  the  dock  where  the 
vessels  were  built,  at  the  Motilones  (which  was  on  the  26th 
of  September  of  the  past  year,  1560),  until  they  arrived  at  the 
village  of  Tortugas,  in  the  month  of  December,  very  little 
rain  fell,  from  which  circumstance  they  concluded  that  it  was 
the  summer  of  this  part  of  the  world  (because  in  all  the  lands 
of  this  New  World,  there  is  no  other  rule  to  know  the  winter 
and  summer,  but  by  the  rainy  or  dry  season).  From  Decem- 
ber it  rained  much,  with  very  heavy  storms  of  wind,  light- 
ning, and  thunder,  causing  great  danger  to  the  brigantines 
and  canoes,  the  waves  of  the  river  being  like  to  those  of  the 
sea  in  a tempest. 

Some  were  of  opinion  that  the  risings  or  freshets  occurred 
all  the  year  round,  for,  from  its  source  until  it  falls  into  the 
sea,  its  length  is  more  than  one  thousand  six  hundred 
leagues  (4,800  miles) ; thus  it  is  necessary  to  pass  through 
very  many  provinces,  and  under  various  constellations,  so 
that  when  in  one  part  the  winter  is  over,  it  begins  in  another; 
and  when  the  freshets  cease  in  one  part,  they  commence  in 
another,  particularly  as  each  locality  has  its  annual  winter 
(or  rainy  season).  All  the  land  by  which  the  river  flows  is 
very  hot  indeed  and  sickly,  which  explains  why  there  are 
so  few  villages,  and  why  it  is  so  thinly  inhabited. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


109 


The  earthen  jars  of  the  natives  were  much  prized,  being 
curious  and  well  made.  No  gold  was  found  amongst  the 
natives  of  the  river,  except  what  was  seen  in  the  provinces 
of  Carari  and  Marari,  where  the  Indians  had  a few  ear-rings, 
but  in  other  parts  they  had  none ; and  when  the  soldiers 
showed  them  pieces  of  gold,  and  asked  them  if  they  had 
such  in  their  country,  they  appeared  to  prize  it  more  than 
any  other  object,  and  the  same  with  silver  ; so  it  was  pre- 
sumed that  they  were  acquainted  with  the  precious  metals, 
and  that  they  obtained  gold  from  other  people,  who  found 
it  in  the  streams  of  their  country.  They  found  innumerable 
quantities  of  turtle,  and  large  nests  of  their  eggs,  and  other 
river  animals. 

3.  A short  distance  before  entering  the  sea,  the  river  has 
so  many  islands,  that  it  is  said  they  number  over  two  thou- 
sand, when  it  is  low  water  ; but  when  the  river  rises  it 
covers  the  greater  portion,  or  nearly  all  of  them,  and  when 
the  sea  has  its  spring  tides,  no  islands  are  seen  ; and  such 
is  the  force  and  bellowing  of  the  beating  waves,  that  it  is 
said  that  the  great  noise  is  heard  at  a distance  of  four 
leagues. 

I find  so  much  difference  of  opinion  amongst  authors  and 
others,  as  to  why  this  river  was  called  Maranon,  or  the 
other  we  have  already  treated  largely  of,  the  Orinoco,1  that 
I cannot  clearly  determine  which  of  the  two  is  the  Maranon, 
so  it  must  remain  unsettled  until  some  one  writes  about  the 
matter  with  better  information ; and  this  is  the  reason  why 
I likewise  call  the  Orinoco,  Maranon. 

From  the  time  the  expedition  left  the  Motilones  until  they 
entered  the  sea,  they  navigated  for  ninety-four  days,  counting 
the  nights,  and  the  rest  of  the  time  they  spent  in  resting, 
building  the  brigantines,  and  other  occupations. 

4.  Lope  de  Aguirre,  finding  himself  with  his  band  upon 
the  waters  of  the  ocean,  ordered  the  vessels  to  steer  for  the 

1 In  another  of  Padre  Simon’s  “ Noticias  historiales.” 


no 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


island  of  Margarita,  with  intentions  already  stated ; but 
desiring  (and  what  sort  of  fears  were  those  that  must  have 
been  always  tormenting  this  traitor,  for  his  vile  conscience 
was  his  executioner)  that  those  in  the  other  brigantine, 
wherein  was  his  maestro  del  campo  and  the  rest  of  the 
people,  might  not  be  in  a position  to  take  another  course, 
but  of  necessity  follow  him,  he  took  away  their  compass  and 
the  cross-staff  used  for  taking  the  sun’s  altitude,  command- 
ing that  they  should  follow  his  brigantine  during  the  day, 
and  his  lantern  at  night.  So  they  navigated  in  this  order, 
being  permitted  by  the  secret  ways  of  Providence.  They 
had  a steady  sea,  and  fair  wind,  and  they  did  not  separate 
from  one  another  in  the  seventeen  days  they  took  to  cross 
that  gulf  from  the  mouth  of  the  river  to  the  island  of  Mar- 
garita.1 If  the  voyage  had  been  longer,  they  must  all  have 
died  of  hunger  and  thirst ; for  in  these  days,  so  extreme 

1 It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  make  out  the  course  taken  by  Aguirre ; 
and  he  certainly  did  not  know  it  himself,  as,  in  his  letter  to  king  Philip, 
he  says,  “ God  knows  how  we  got  through  that  great  mass  of  waters.” 

Acuna  says,  “ God  did  not  permit  that  Aguirre  should  discover  the 
principal  mouth  by  which  this  great  river  empties  itself  into  the  ocean; 
but  he  came  out  on  the  coast,  opposite  the  island  of  Trinidad.”  Hum- 
boldt, after  carefully  reading  Simon’s  narrative,  could  see  nothing  to 
indicate  that  Aguirre  ever  went  out  of  the  bed  of  the  Amazons  ; and,  as 
the  current  runs  strongly  to  the  north-west  at  its  mouth,  he  might  easily 
have  reached  Margarita  in  seventeen  days.  Orellana,  in  1541,  left  the 
mouth  of  the  Amazons  on  the  26th  of  August,  and  reached  Cubagua 
(between  Margarita  and  the  main  land)  on  the  11th  of  September,  sail- 
ing through  the  Gulf  of  Paria. 

Padre  Simon,  however,  distinctly  states  that,  in  order  to  avoid  the 
country  of  the  Omaguas,  which  he  believed  to  be  lower  down  the  main 
stream,  Aguirre  altered  his  course  to  the  west  ; that  is,  he  made  his  way 
up  one  of  the  great  rivers  which  flow  into  the  Amazons  from  the  north 
and  west,  probably  the  Rio  Negro.  This  view  of  the  case  is  confirmed 
by  the  mention  of  the  cannibal  Arelcainas  Indians,  who  certainly  dwell 
near  the  head  waters  of  the  Putumayu  and  Rio  Negro.  lie  thus  reached 
the  ocean,  either  by  ascending  the  Rio  Negro,  and  the  Cassiquiari,  into 
the  Orinoco,  which  seems  most  probable  : or  by  “a  communication  of 
the  rivers  of  Guiana.” 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


Ill 


was  their  suffering  from  both  (particularly  those  who  were 
not  great  friends  of  Aguirre,  for  the  latter  had  the  additional 
food  which  the  others  wanted)  that  the  rations  given  to  each 
soldier  daily  were  scanty  indeed ; the  grains  of  maize  were 
counted,  and  they  were  allowed  the  fourth  part  of  a quar- 
tillo  of  water.  This  want  of  provisions  made  them  so  ill, 
that  when  they  arrived  in  sight  of  the  island  of  Marga- 
rita, they  thought  more  of  dying  than  of  landing  on  its 
shore. 

When  they  were  in  a position  to  land,  the  pilots,  not 
knowing  the  port  of  Pampatar,  which  is  the  principal  one, 
coasted  along  with  care,  but  without  fear,  as  these  vessels 
drew  so  little  water,  and  the  weather  was  favourable.  But 
as  they  were  nearing  the  island,  the  brigantines  were 
separated  by  a mareta1  (a  wind  that  rises  by  degrees  and 
blows  violently),  which  took  them  into  different  ports,  that  of 

It  has  also  been  suggested  that  Aguirre  ascended  the  Rio  Negro,  and 
its  tributary  the  Rio  Branco,  and,  by  a short  u portage”,  crossed  to  the 
Rupununi,  a tributary  of  the  Essequibo,  which  river  he  followed  to  the 
Atlantic.  A careful  perusal  of  the  narrative,  however,  will  show  that 
this  was  not  possible. 

Acosta  says,  “ The  great  river  called  by  some  the  river  of  Amazons, 
by  others  Marabou,  and  by  others  the  river  Orellana,  flows  from  the 
mountains  of  Peru,  from  whence  it  receives  a great  abundance  of  water, 
both  of  rain  and  of  rivers  ; then,  passing  by  the  great  plains  of  Paytiti, 
Dorado,  and  the  Amazons,  in  the  end  it  falls  into  the  ocean,  almost  right 
against  the  islands  of  Margarita  and  Trinidad.” 

“ A brother  of  our  Company,  being  then  young,  sailed  it  in  the  com- 
pany of  Pedro  de  Ursua,  with  whom  he  was  present  at  all  the  adventures 
of  this  strange  entry  and  discovery,  and  at  the  seditions  and  pernicious 
acts  of  that  wicked  Diego{V)  de  Aguirre,  from  the  which  God  delivered 
him,  to  place  him  in  our  Company.” — Acosta,  lib.  ii,  cap.  6. 

It  will  be  observed  that  Acosta  here  says  that  the  mouth  of  the  Mara- 
bou is  “ almost  right  against  the  islands  of  Margarita  and  Trinidad.” 
He  obtained  this  information  from  one  who  was  with  Aguirre;  and  this 
assertion  must  be  considered  as  very  strong  additional  evidence  that  the 
traitors  made  their  way  to  the  sea,  by  the  Rio  Negro,  Cassiquiari,  and 
Orinoco. 

1 This  name  is  also  given  to  a peculiar  commotion  of  the  sea. 


112 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Aguirre  into  one  then  known  as  Paraguache,  now  called  the 
Tyrant's  Port?  four  leagues  from  Pampatar,  and  that  of 
Martin  Perez  into  another,  to  the  north,  two  leagues  dis- 
tant from  Aguirre,  and  four  from  the  town. 

No  sooner  had  Aguirre  got  into  port  than  he  was  seized 
with  terrible  suspicions  and  fears  of  Gonzalo  de  Fuentes, 
who  had  been  one  of  Don  Fernando’s  captains,  and  of  a 
soldier  named  Diego  de  Alcaraz,  who  had  been  justicia 
mayor  of  the  mutineers.  He  had  no  guarantee  that  when  they 
had  the  opportunity,  they  would  not  join  any  people  whom 
they  found  loyal  to  their  king,  and  leave  him.  So,  to  quiet 
his  suspicions,  that  infernal  man,  before  any  one  went  on 
shore,  ordered  them  to  be  strangled,  without  confession,  for 
this  tyrant  took  pleasure  in  killing  both  body  and  soul. 
The  intention  of  those  who  thus  desired  confession  could  be 
of  little  value,  being  a sacrament  of  desire,  which  theologians 
call  en  voto.  Gonzalo  Guiral,  before  he  was  made  away 
with,  prayed  most  earnestly  to  be  shriven.  This  the  traitor 
would  not  listen  to,  and  so,  without  losing  any  time,  he 
choked  him.  While  they  were  putting  the  cord  round  his 
throat  he  began  to  cry  out,  begging  for  confession,  and  the 
traitors,  fearing  that  some  one  on  shore  might  hear  his  cries, 
stabbed  him  to  death. 

Shortly  afterwards  Lope  de  Aguirre  went  on  shore  with 
some  of  his  friends.  This  was  on  Monday,  in  the  evening, 
the  20th  of  July,  1561.  He  sent  orders  to  the  other  vessel, 
by  a soldier  named  Rodriguez,  his  confidant,  for  the  people 
to  join  him.  Rodriguez  went  with  certain  Indians  of 
the  island,  who  were  in  the  port,  and  served  as  guides,  to 
find  where  the  maestro  del  campo  had  been  driven  to,  and  to 
tell  him  early  that  night  to  come  with  all  his  people  and 

1 The  port  of  Paraguache  still  hears  the  name  of  the  “ Tyrant's  Port:" 
and  when  the  people  of  Cumana,  and  the  island  of  Margarita,  pronounce 
the  words  uEl  Tirano"  it  is  always  to  denote  the  infamous  Lope  de 
Aguirre. — Humboldt , JVarr.,  ii,  p.  213  (note). 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


113 


join  Aguirre.  Rodriguez  had  orders  to  strangle  Sancho 
Pizarro  on  the  road,  for  Aguirre  was  suspicious  of  him.  The 
traitor  then  sent  his  captain  of  horse,  Diego  Tirado,  with  two 
or  three  friends,  to  the  city  of  Margarita,  to  say  that  they 
had  missed  their  way  in  sailing  out  of  the  Maranon,  and 
were  in  great  want  of  provisions,  and  to  pray  the  inhabit- 
ants, in  his  name,  to  provide  them  with  some.  This  embassy 
was  accomplished  by  Tirado,  with  all  care  and  punctuality. 


CHAP.  XXVII. 

1 . The  maestro  del  campo,  having  received  Aguirre's  orders , departs , and 
strangles  Sancho  Pizarro  on  the  road. — 2.  A piragua  with  Indians 
is  sent  from  the  port  of  Margarita , to  examine  the  brigantines  of 
Aguirre,  and  a party  of  soldiers  visit  him. — 3.  The  Margarita  people 
give  Aguirre  two  bullocks,  and  he  recompenses  them. — 4.  The  gover- 
nor, on  account  of  a letter  received  from  Aguirre,  decides  upon  visit- 
ing him,  accompanied  by  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  city. — 5.  The 
governor  offers  him  hospitality.  The  traitor  marshals  his  armed 
men  before  the  governor. 

1.  Rodriguez  went  quickly  to  Martin  Perez,  who  had 
sent  one  Diego  Lucero,  with  a guide,  to  inform  Aguirre  of 
his  arrival,  and  to  ask  what  he  was  to  do.  The  maestro  del 
campo,  having  received  Aguirre’s  message,  disembarked  his 
people  ; but  he  was  obliged  to  delay  a little  for  Roberto  de 
Susaya,  a barber,  and  Francisco  Hernandez,  a pilot,  whom 
he  had  sent  with  some  negro  slaves  to  some  farms  half  a 
league  oft*,  in  search  of  food.  They  returned  at  midnight,  when 
they  all  commenced  their  march,  and  they  did  not  forget  to 
strangle  Sancho  Pizarro  on  the  way. 

Aguirre  sent  one  Juan  Gomez,  a caulker,  his  admiral,  and 
some  soldiers  in  search  of  food  at  the  farms,  who  lost  their 
way  and  suffered  great  privations.  They  met  with  some  Span- 

Q 


114 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


iards,  but  did  them  no  harm,  awaiting  a more  favourable 
opportunity.  They  merely  pressed  upon  them  the  necessity 
of  letting  them  have  provisions,  which  they  did. 

?j.  Great  was  the  surprise  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  port  of 
Margarita,  when  the  vessels  first  hove  in  sight,  for  they  be- 
lieved them  to  be  French  ; but  they  were  somewhat  quieted 
when  they  discovered  that  they  were  but  small  vessels,  pro- 
bably concerned  in  a similar  occupation  to  their  own,  that  of 
pearl  fishing ; and,  as  they  did  not  make  direct  for  the  port,  it 
was  concluded  that  they  were  strangers  to  the  coast,  and  a 
piragua  with  some  Indians  was  sent  out  to  see  what  vessels 
they  were,  but  they  did  not  come  alongside  until  Aguirre’s 
ship  was  at  anchor.  He  got  hold  of  the  Indians,  and 
would  not  let  them  return,  keeping  them  for  guides.  How- 
ever, when  the  people  of  the  city  knew  that  the  brigan- 
tine had  anchored,  they  sent  some  Spaniards  by  land  to 
ascertain  who  their  guests  were,  and,  although  these  soldiers 
met  with  Diego  Tirado  and  others  on  the  road,  they  could 
not  ascertain  exactly  who  they  were,  or  what  was  their  object, 
for  the  tyrants  were  most  careful  in  what  they  said,  only 
stating  that  they  had  been  thrown  on  the  coast  by  contrary 
winds,  and  were  in  great  want  of  provisions.  The  soldiers  of 
Margarita  continued  their  march  to  the  port  where  Aguirre 
was,  with  a few  of  his  friends,  who  were  not  ill,  the  rest 
being  hid  below  decks  on  board  the  vessel.  They  saluted 
each  other,  when  Aguirre  told  them  that  he  had  come 
from  Piru  in  consequence  of  having  heard  of  great  dis- 
coveries to  be  made  on  the  lower  part  of  the  Maranon,  and, 
having  lost  himself  through  adverse  circumstances,  it  had 
pleased  God  that  he  should  arrive  at  this  island,  so  that  he 
might  not  perish,  as  he  and  his  people  would  have  done  (the 
sick,  whom  he  showed,  as  well  as  the  healthy),  if  his  voy- 
age had  continued  much  longer.  He  begged  of  them, 
for  the  love  of  God,  to  do  him  the  favour  to  send  some  meat 
and  other  provisions  to  meet  the  present  necessities,  that 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


115 


money  was  ready  to  pay  what  they  might  further  require, 
and  that  they  should  soon  sail  for  Nombre  de  Dios,  on  their 
way  back  to  Piru. 

3.  The  citizens  condoled  with  them  on  their  sufferings, 
which  Aguirre  well  knew  how  to  represent.  They  ordered 
two  bullocks  to  be  killed  (the  first  they  could  lay  hands  on), 
and  expressed  a wish  that  they  had  more  to  offer  to  Aguirre, 
who,  blandly  accepted  the  offering,  made  them  presents  in 
return,  giving  to  one  Gaspar  Hernandez  a scarlet  cloak 
trimmed  with  gold  lace  ; thus  commencing  the  treachery  he 
intended  to  him  and  to  the  rest,  letting  him  know  that  they 
came  rich  from  Piru,  that  they  were  frank  and  liberal,  and 
that  others  from  the  town  should  come  and  see  them. 

Aguirre,  having  discovered  the  good  disposition  of  the 
messengers  to  forward  his  schemes,  added  to  the  present 
of  the  cloak,  a silver-gilt  cup.  They  were  so  pleased  and 
satisfied,  that  they  made  up  their  minds  to  remain  there  that 
night.  They,  therefore,  sent  a letter  to  the  city,  informing 
Don  Juan  de  Villandrando,  the  governor  of  the  island,  what 
had  passed,  telling  him  who  the  people  were  that  had  come, 
that  they  came  from  Piru  having  lost  their  way,  that  they 
only  wished  to  purchase  provisions  and  return  to  Piru,  and 
that  it  appeared  that  they  had  much  money  and  other  riches, 
as  he  would  see  by  the  scarlet  cloak,  and  the  large  silver 
cup  that  had  been  given  them. 

4.  Although  Diego  Tirado  and  other  soldiers  had  reached 
the  town,  the  people  had  not  considered  it  necessary  to  give 
them  any  particular  welcome,  until  the  letter  arrived,  when 
they  at  once  believed  what  Tirado  had  said  (he  being  very 
quiet  as  to  their  real  object). 

The  governor  and  cabildo  gave  instant  orders  (spurred  on 
by  the  reward  of  good  pay)  to  send  provisions  to  them,  and 
many  of  the  inhabitants  wished  to  make  a visit  to  the  new 
comers ; but  it  was  thought  more  prudent  that  a few  only 
should  go.  The  governor,  one  alguazil,  named  Manuel 


116 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Rodriguez,  one  regidor,  Andres  de  Salamanca,  and  three  or 
four  of  the  more  important  inhabitants  of  the  city,  deter- 
mined to  visit  Aguirre. 

They  set  off  a little  after  midnight,  so  as  not  to  travel  in 
the  very  hot  sun,  which  is  always  oppressive  in  that  island, 
and  journeyed  to  the  port  where  Aguirre  was.  They  were 
followed  and  joined  by  more  people  on  the  road  than  was 
at  first  arranged,  who  desired  to  see  the  strangers,  and 
they  all  arrived  at  their  destination  at  daybreak.  Aguirre 
had  his  troops  well  armed  and  below  decks,  on  board  the 
brigantine,  so  that  they  were  not  seen  that  night. 

When  the  governor  and  his  party  arrived,  Aguirre,  with 
some  attendants,  went  out  to  meet  him.  When  the  governor 
dismounted,  Aguirre  approached,  showing  him  the  great- 
est respect  and  submission,  and  if  the  governor  had  per- 
mitted him  to  kiss  his  feet,  he  would  readily  have  done  so. 
The  soldiers  did  the  same  to  the  citizens,  and  took  charge 
of  their  horses,  with  great  reverence,  taking  them  to  tie  up 
under  some  trees,  rather  distant,  so  that,  when  the  governor 
and  his  friends  needed  them,  they  could  not  be  readily  got. 

5.  The  governor  embraced  Aguirre,  when  he  knew  he 
was  the  commanding  officer,  and  with  other  courteous  inti- 
mations offered  him  his  personal  services,  his  house,  and  all 
in  it,  for  himself  and  his  soldiers.  Aguirre  replied  with 
honied  words  and  courtly  thanks,  in  which  some  time  was 
passed,  standing.  Aguirre  considered  he  was  losing  valuable 
time  in  what  he  intended  to  do,  so,  leaving  the  governor  and 
the  inhabitants  occupied  with  his  soldiers,  he  left  the  party, 
saying  that  he  had  occasion  to  go  on  board  the  brigantine, 
where  he  ordered  the  soldiers  to  be  in  readiness,  the  moment 
he  ordered  them  to  come  on  shore.  He  then  returned  to 
the  shore,  and  joined  the  governor,  to  whom  he  showed  great 
apparent  devotion  and  friendship,  and,  when  he  found  a 
proper  occasion,  he  said,  “ Senor,  the  soldiers  from  Peru, 
who  are  so  much  attached  to  a martial  life,  and  inter- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


117 


ested  in  these  Indian  campaigns,  are  more  desirous  of  being 
well  armed  than  of  dressing  in  fine  clothing,  although  they 
always  have  more  than  they  want ; so  I beseech  you  to 
allow  them  to  come  on  shore  with  their  arms  and  arquebusses 
to  exercise,  and  at  the  same  time  they  can  purchase  some 
things  they  require  from  your  people.55 

The  governor  was  a young  man,  and  desiring  to  see 
them  and  their  firearms,  he  replied  that  he  granted  the 
request ; and  had  he  been  an  old  one  and  used  to  arms,  he 
would  have  done  the  same,  if  only  for  curiosity's  sake. 
But,  in  truth,  when  he  gave  his  consent,  it  was  of  but  little 
importance,  for  he  was  surrounded  by  the  traitors ; and  had 
he  had  any  suspicion  of  their  designs,  and  desired  to  escape, 
he  could  not  have  done  it,  or  have  done  otherwise  than 
Aguirre  chose.  So,  with  the  governor’s  permission,  the  traitor 
went  on  board  again,  and  said  to  the  Maranones,  “ Mark  me 
well,  my  Maranones,  sharpen  your  swords,  and  clean  the 
arquebusses,  for  they  must  be  damp,  from  being  at  sea.  You 
have  the  governor’s  permission  to  go  on  shore  armed,  and  if 
he  had  not  given  it,  you  might  have  taken  it.” 

The  soldiers  then  came  on  deck  and  saluted  the  governor, 
by  firing  their  arquebusses,  and  showing  that  their  arms  con- 
sisted of  lances,  halberds,  and  arquebusses,  more  than  they 
had  in  their  hands. 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 

i . Aguirre  makes  prisoners  of  the  governor,  alcalde , and  their  companions. 
— 2.  All  the  traitors  march  towards  the  city  with  the  governor ; the 
maestro  del  campo  takes  possession  of  the  city  in  the  name  of  Aguirre. 
— 3.  Aguirre  enters  the  city , and  robs  the  royal  treasury. — 4.  He 
continues  his  insolence , by  a thousand  threats. 

1.  This  being  done,  Aguirre  returned  on  shore  to  the 
governor,  to  thank  him  on  the  part  of  the  soldiers  for  the 


118 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


permission  he  had  given  them  to  land,  when  he  shortly  re- 
turned on  board  (for  the  volcano  of  his  treasons,  which 
burned  within  his  breast,  prevented  him  from  being  in  re- 
pose for  a moment  anywhere),  to  tell  the  soldiers  what  they 
had  to  do. 

It  did  not  appear  to  the  governor  to  be  prudent  to  allow 
so  many  armed  men  to  be  there ; so  he  stepped  on  one  side 
with  his  followers,  and  debated  how  they  might  disarm 
them,  being  really  ignorant  of  Aguirre’s  intentions,  for  they 
were  not  accustomed  to  tumultuous  or  mutinous  people. 
Whether  this  discussion  of  the  governor’s  as  to  disarming, 
proceeded  from  covetousness,  or  from  fear,  we  cannot  say, 
but  we  think  it  was  more  likely  the  latter. 

The  traitor  Aguirre  caused  his  men  to  land  well  armed, 
and  in  order  of  battle,  and  marched  to  where  the  governor 
and  his  friends  stood.  He  then  changed  the  tone  and 
manner  he  had  previously  used,  and  said,  “ We,  Sehores, 
as  already  stated,  are  returning  to  Piru,  where  tumults  and 
wars  are  not  wanting,  and  we  are  informed,  that  you  have  the 
idea  that  we  do  not  go  to  serve  the  king,  and  that  you  wish 
to  stay  our  voyage  and  take  our  arms  from  us,  also  that  it  is 
certain  you  do  not  intend  to  treat  us  with  hospitality;  so, 
Sehores,  you  will  consider  yourselves  our  prisoners  ; but  you 
must  be  active  (you  being  our  prisoners)  in  ordering  all  we 
may  require  to  be  given  to  us,  for  our  voyage.” 

This  caused  a tumult  amongst  the  governor’s  party,  and 
they  went  back  a few  paces,  saying,  “ What  is  all  this  ? 
what  is  all  this  ?”  putting  their  hands  to  their  swords,  as  if  in 
defence  ; but  this  was  in  vain,  for  the  traitors  surrounded 
them,  presented  lances,  partisans,  and  arquebusses  to  their 
breasts,  and  thus  they  were  made  prisoners ; when  Aguirre, 
his  captains  and  soldiers,  advanced  and  disarmed  them, 
taking  also  their  staves  of  office,  and  their  horses.  They 
then  mounted,  and  took  possession  of  the  passes,  and  roads, 
so  that  no  one  could  go  to  the  city,  and  give  information  of 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


119 


what  had  been  done  ; and  if  they  met  with  any  inhabitants, 
they  disarmed  them,  robbed  them  of  their  horses,  and 
brought  them  in  on  foot. 

2.  Aguirre  then  ordered  (so  that  himself  or  soldiers  might 
lose  no  time)  the  march  to  the  city.  He  mounted  the 
governor’s  horse,  inviting  him,  if  he  pleased,  to  get  up 
behind;  but  the  governor  was  so  disconcerted  and  angry  at 
seeing  himself  in  such  a position,  that  he  refused  the  offer. 
Aguirre,  seeing  this,  dismounted,  saying  : “ Well,  then,  we 
will  all  go  on  foot and,  having  walked  a short  distance, 
they  met  his  maestro  del  campo,  and  all  the  people  of  the 
other  brigantine,  who  were  on  their  march  to  join  the 
traitor  Aguirre.  He  was  pleased  to  receive  this  addition  to 
his  own  men,  assuring  himself  the  more  that  he  would 
succeed  in  his  designs.  The  two  bands  complimented  each 
other  on  having  imprisoned  the  authorities,  and  continued 
their  way  together  to  the  town.  While  on  the  road  (for  he 
was  tired  of  walking),  Aguirre  mounted  the  governor’s 
horse,  and  invited  him  to  get  up  behind.  The  governor, 
seeing  he  got  nothing  by  being  angry,  and  feeling  the  pain 
of  going  on  foot,  chose  the  least  evil,  and  got  up  behind, 
Aguirre  being  in  the  saddle;  and  so  they  travelled,  dis- 
arming all  the  people  they  met,  and  taking  their  horses, 
thus  obliging  them  to  return  on  foot. 

Martin  Perez,  who  was  well  mounted,  went  in  advance, 
with  a chosen  party,  to  take  possession  of  the  city  in  Aguirre’s 
name,  which  he  did  on  St.  Magdalen’s  day,  on  a Monday  (a 
bitter  one  for  the  inhabitants)  at  noon,  the  soldiers  shouting, 
“ Long  live  Aguirre  ! liberty,  liberty  ! long  live  Aguirre  !” 
They  were  highly  excited,  and  running  through  the  streets, 
went  to  the  fort,  which  was  open,  and  which  they  took  pos- 
session of.  Some  of  them  went  in  parties  about  the  streets, 
taking  arms  from  all  who  had  them,  and  treating  the  people 
with  great  insolence. 

8.  Thus  were  these  ministers  of  Satan  occupied,  and  the 


120 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


city  was  in  a fearful  tumult,  when  Aguirre  entered  with  his 
prisoners,  and  went  straight  to  the  fort,  leaving  the  prisoners 
under  a strong  guard.  He  presently  came  out,  with  his 
soldiers,  to  the  plaza,  where  they  commenced  chopping  at 
the  rollo'  with  axes,  but  as  it  was  thick,  and  made  of  very 
hard  guayacan  wood,  it  was  like  cutting  at  flint,  so  that  the 
steel  flew  from  the  hatchets,  while  the  rollo  received  no 
particular  harm,  and  some  prognosticated  that  it  would 
remain  there,  as  representing  justice,  and  the  name  of  the 
king,  by  whom  it  had  been  erected ; and  not  by  traitors. 
The  great  hardness  of  the  wood  was  attributed  to  that  cause. 
However  this  might  be,  the  rollo  remained  standing  with 
honour. 

Aguirre,  hating  the  name  of  the  king,  then  passed  onwards 
with  his  soldiers  to  the  royal  treasury,  and,  without  waiting 
for  the  keys,  or  for  the  officers  to  give  him  an  account,  he 
broke  the  doors  to  pieces,  and  robbed  a large  quantity  of 
gold  and  pearls,  being  the  king’s  fifths  and  the  royal  reve- 
nues ; his  men  also  destroyed  the  books,  containing  the 
accounts  of  the  treasury. 

The  traitor,  now  that  he  saw  himself  master  of  the  city, 
issued  a proclamation,  under  pain  of  death,  that  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  island  should  appear  before  him  with  all 
their  arms,  offensive  and  defensive,  and  that  no  one  should 
leave  the  city  under  the  same  penalty.  He  then  ordered  a 
pipe  of  wine,  of  more  than  forty  arrobas,2  to  be  brought  to 
the  fort,  from  the  store  of  a merchant,  so  that  his  soldiers 
might  drink  and  be  merry.  They  emptied  the  pipe  of  wine 
in  two  hours. 

4.  The  traitor  was  informed  that  a merchant,  named 
Gaspar  de  Plazuela,  had  ordered  a vessel  belonging  to  him, 
that  was  coming  from  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo,  to  be 

' A column  of  wood  or  stone,  often  erected  by  the  Spaniards  as  an 
emblem  of  jurisdiction. 

2 Arroba=25  lbs. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


1£1 

concealed ; so  he  caused  the  merchant  to  be  arrested,  and 
ordered  him  to  be  killed,  if  the  vessel  did  not  make  its 
appearance. 

He  ordered  some  of  his  most  trusty  soldiers  to  prevent 
the  inhabitants  from  hiding  their  wares  and  other  property, 
by  visiting  all  the  houses,  and  making  a list  of  all  they 
found,  especially  of  goods,  wine,  and  provisions,  command- 
ing, under  the  severest  penalties,  that  nothing  should  be 
taken  from  the  sequestered  property. 

This  was  done  by  his  satellites,  and  even  more,  for  they 
took  all  the  silk  and  linen  clothing,  and  much  wine  and  eat- 
ables, filling  the  fort  with  some,  and  taking  the  rest  to 
rooms,  stores,  and  shops,  whose  owners  were  commanded, 
under  pain  of  death,  not  to  remove  the  smallest  portion. 

Aguirre  possessed  himself  of  a certain  quantity  of  mer- 
chandize, which  was  the  property  of  the  king,  dividing  it 
amongst  his  soldiers.  He  ordered  that  all  the  canoes  and 
piraguas  in  the  island  should  be  brought  to  his  port,  with 
the  intention  of  breaking  them  all  up,  so  that  no  one  should 
leave  the  island,  and  give  notice  of  his  proceedings.  Thus 
ended  the  work  of  the  first  day,  and  then  they  retired  to  rest. 

The  traitor  found  this  island  in  the  most  prosperous  state, 
full  of  provisions,  merchandize,  and  money,  and  most  abund- 
ant in  pearls,  for  in  the  past  years  the  pearl  fishery  here, 
and  in  the  neighbouring  island  of  Cubagua,  had  been  very 
successful.  In  consequence  of  the  depredations  of  these 
tyrants,  it  sank  from  a state  of  great  prosperity,  and  has 
not  raised  its  head  from  that  time. 

Great  indeed  was  the  grief  of  the  inhabitants  at  seeing 
their  governor  and  alcalde  prisoners,  their  wives  captives, 
their  daughters  abused,  their  homes  burnt,  their  estates  and 
lands  sacked,  their  cattle  slain;  and  this  grief  was  augmented, 
seeing  that  all  this  misery  was  brought  about  by  the  hands 
of  Christians,  who  were  not  ignorant  of  the  crimes  they  were 
committing,  before  God,  and  by  a traitor  who  was  lost  to 

R 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


100 
JL  .V.V 

Christian  feelings.  They  threw  all  the  blame  of  this 
terrible  state  of  things  on  the  covetousness  of  the  governor, 
who,  if  he  had  not  been  tempted  to  leave  the  city,  as  he  did, 
might  have  defended  it ; but  as  he  went,  he  was  made 
prisoner,  and  so  he  remained. 


CHAP.  XXIX. 

1.  For  the  love  of  a roving  life,  liTce  that  which  these  traitors  led , some 
soldiers  of  the  island  join  them , which  causes  no  little  detriment. — 
2.  Aguirre  sends  to  take  a ship  that  was  in  Maracapana , belonging 
to  the  Provincial  of  Santo  Domingo , but  fails. — 3.  The  Provincial 
of  Santo  Domingo  determines  to  go  in  his  ship , to  the  port  of  Bur- 
burata , and  other  parts , to  give  notice  of  the  proceedings  of  Aguirre. 
Aguirre  orders  provisions  to  be  collected. — 4.  Aguirre  addresses  the 
people  of  the  island  with  feigned  words , and  even  with  lies. 

1.  The  evil  example,  treasons  and  roving  life  of  the 
tyrants,  was  the  cause  that  some  of  the  soldiers  belonging  to 
the  city  and  island  followed  their  example,  having  the  same 
inclinations,  and  not  being  punished  for  their  violence, 
robberies,  and  insolence,  like  unto  the  soldiers  of  the  traitor, 
for  such  had  become  their  trade ; they  were  rather  favoured 
by  Aguirre,  particularly  those  who  exceeded  the  others  in 
mischief,  and  boasted  that  they  were  against  the  king. 
Aguirre  considered  this  a most  important  political  element, 
that  the  more  culpable  his  soldiers  were,  the  firmer  hold  had 
he  on  them,  and  that  they  would  not  leave  his  protection, 
fearing  the  justice  of  the  king.  So  some  soldiers,  on  the 
island,  determined  to  put  themselves  under  Aguirre’s 
banner,  offering  to  follow  him  wherever  he  went,  and  to  lay 
down  their  lives  as  his  vassals,  and  with  no  less  loyalty  than 
those  followers  whom  he  had  brought  with  him.  The  tyrant 
gladly  admitted  them  into  his  band,  advancing  their  pay  out 
of  the  government  funds  he  had  robbed.  Thus  he  bound 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


123 


them  to  serve  him,  as  they  had  promised,  for  any  other 
conduct  would  have  cost  them  their  heads.  He  then  gave 
them  permission  to  become  as  great  villains  as  the  rest,  and 
this  was  exactly  what  they  desired.  They  joined  the  other 
soldiers,  and  led  them  to  those  spots,  of  which  they  knew, 
where  the  inhabitants  had  hidden  some  of  their  property, 
merchandize,  clothes,  jewels,  and  strings  of  pearls.  They 
effected  these  robberies  secretly,  and  divided  the  plunder  ; 
but  these  acts  were  the  cause  of  much  greater  evils,  destruc- 
tion, and  cruelties  than  if  they  had  merely  joined  in  the 
forays ; for  as  these  fellows  knew  every  corner  of  the  island, 
for  it  was  not  a large  one,  they  gave  information  on  all 
points,  showing  to  the  Marahones,  the  estates  where  some 
persons  had  fled  to,  or  had  their  wives  and  children,  as  they 
thought,  in  safety. 

Amongst  other  things  these  new  soldiers  informed 
Aguirre  that,  in  the  port  and  small  village  of  Maracapana, 
there  was  at  that  time  a provincial  of  the  order  of  Santo 
Domingo,  named  fray  Francisco  Montesinos,  with  certain 
settlers  and  soldiers,  occupied  in  the  conversion  of  the 
Indians,  whom  his  majesty  had  committed  to  his  charge  ; 
who  had  a fine,  large,  and  well  armed  ship,  which  could  be 
easily  taken  and  brought  to  the  island,  and  would  serve 
them  well  for  their  voyage  to  Nombre  de  Dios. 

This  was  just  such  a piece  of  information  as  would  please  the 
tyrant,  and  no  time  was  lost  in  getting  one  of  the  brigantines 
ready,  with  eighteen  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  a cap- 
tain named  Pedro  de  Monguia,  with  a negro  as  pilot,  who 
knew  the  navigation  of  the  coast  well.  They  were  ordered 
not  to  touch  anywhere,  but  to  sail  direct  to  where  the  pro- 
vincial was,  to  take  possession  of  the  ship,  and  bring  it  to 
Margarita. 

Monguia  started,  and  just  outside  the  port  he  fell  in  with 
Plazuela’s  vessel  (until  the  arrival  of  which,  its  owner  was 
to  be  detained  in  prison),  which  he  sent  in,  after  having 


124 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


boarded  it,  and  Diego  Hernandez,  a Portuguese,  with  three 
companions,  devoted  to  Aguirre,  entered  the  port  of  Mar- 
garita ; so  this  saved  the  life  of  Flazuela. 

Monguia  continued  his  route,  and  when  nearly  within 
sight  of  the  port  of  Maracapana,  he  and  some  of  the  soldiers 
weighed  the  matter  they  were  upon  (thinking  they  ought 
not  to  be  so  vile  and  wickedly  intentioned),  and  decided  that 
their  lives  would  be  in  safer  keeping  if  they  remained  with 
the  provincial,  than  if  they  returned  to  Aguirre.  They  re- 
solved to  inform  the  provincial  of  all  they  knew  ; for  Mon- 
guia, and  those  who  thought  with  him,  considered  that 
when  fortune  ceased  to  befriend  them  in  the  path  the 
traitors  were  taking,  their  end  would  be  miserable,  and  that 
they  would  all  have  cruel  deaths. 

3.  All  Monguia’s  companions  did  not  think  with  him,  for 
they  were  now  so  accustomed  to  the  life  they  led  with 
Aguirre,  that  it  would  be  almost  death  to  them  to  leave  it ; 
however,  at  last,  some  had  to  feign  acquiescence,  others 
were  forced  to  submit,  and  they  stood  right  for  the  pro- 
vincial’s ship,  who  received  them  with  pleasure,  but  with 
calmness,  until  he  was  informed  of  the  cause  of  their  coming, 
and  of  the  extraordinary  news  they  continued  to  give  him  of 
what  was  going  on  at  Margarita.  This  so  excited  him  that, 
not  trusting  the  soldiers  (although  they  had  made  known  to 
him  their  good  intentions),  he  had  them  disarmed,  and  was 
most  cautious  of  them,  which  they  could  not  object  to,  as  such 
conduct  would  have  shown  that  they  were  not  innocent,  and 
without  blame  as  to  what  might  have  happened  up  to  this 
time  ; for  they  protested  that  the  deeds  of  Aguirre  did  not 
meet  with  their  approval.  Pray  Francisco  Montesinos  de- 
termined to  sail  immediately  in  his  ship,  accompanied  by 
the  Marahones,  and  to  inform  the  authorities  in  the  port 
of  Burburata,  which  is  under  the  government  of  Venezuela, 
and  in  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo,  and,  in  his  route,  to 
pass  by  Margarita  and  see  if  he  could  not  attack  and  rout 
Aguirre. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


125 


Aguirre  had  made  up  his  mind,  the  moment  he  had 
despatched  Monguia,  that  he  had  the  provincial  in  his 
power,  and  that  he  and  his  band  would  get  away  to  Nombre 
de  Dios,  with  all  celerity  and  ease.  In  order  that  there 
might  he  no  delay,  on  the  score  of  provisions,  when  the 
ship  arrived,  he  ordered  the  inhabitants  to  bring  six  hundred 
sheep  and  some  bullocks  to  him,  so  as  to  salt  them  down, 
also  a large  quantity  of  cassava,  ready  for  the  arrival  of  the 
ship. 

The  tyrant  was  anxious  that  his  men  should  be  well  cared 
for  in  the  houses  in  which  he  had  placed  them : he  did  not 
send  his  men  to  some  of  the  principal  houses,  in  order  that 
their  owners  might  send  food  to  himself  and  to  the  soldiers 
of  his  guard,  who  were  generally  in  the  fort.  During  the 
day  the  soldiers  were  in  their  quarters,  eating  and  drink- 
ing, also  in  evil  doings ; at  night  they  slept  in  the  fort  in  an 
open  space,  and  as  it  was  a hot  country,  each  laid  himself 
down  wherever  sleep  overtook  him,  for  they  were  so  vile 
and  common  a lot,  that  they  perhaps  had  never  had  better 
resting  places. 

4.  Aguirre  caused  some  of  the  principal,  and  nearly  all 
the  other  inhabitants,  to  assemble  in  the  plazuela  of  the  fort, 
with  the  object  of  explaining  away  the  disgust  they  felt  of  the 
soldiers  quartered  on  them  ; and  to  console  them  with  his 
accustomed  untruthful  expressions,  saying,  “ My  very  dear 
friends,  be  it  well  known  to  you,  that  my  arrival  in  this  island 
with  my  companions  is  not  with  the  object  of  settling  here, 
neither  to  offend  any  of  you,  but  rather  to  render  you  good 
service  ; for,  God  is  my  judge,  that  I did  not  intend  to  re- 
main here  more  than  four  days ; but  my  ships  came  in  such 
a bad  state,  that  it  was  impossible  to  continue  my  voyage  with 
them,  and,  not  finding  here  any  other  vessels  to  meet  my 
wants,  I am  obliged,  now  that  Providence  has  proportioned 
me  the  ship  of  the  Peverend  Father  Provincial,  to  await  its 
arrival,  rather  than  build  others,  which  would  detain  us 


1 26 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


here  a much  longer  time  than  if  we  waited  for  that  of  the 
Provincial.  But  be  you  sure  that,  as  soon  as  the  ship 
arrives,  we  will  leave  your  country  and  continue  our  voy- 
age, for  which  I have  begged  of  you  to  prepare,  without  loss 
of  time,  the  necessary  provisions  for  us  ; and  this  has  like- 
wise been  the  reason,  as  I will  explain  to  you,  why  I have 
imprisoned  the  governor  and  other  Caballeros,  so  that  there 
might  be  greater  facility  and  security  that  we  could  supply 
our  wants  with  our  money ; for,  as  I have  already  often  said, 
I do  not  wish  that  either  my  soldiers  or  myself  should  take 
these  things,  without  paying  the  highest  prices  for  them  ; and 
this  I again  repeat,  for  I well  understand  that  you  wish  to  be 
most  favourable  to  us,  or  that  fearing  us,  you  let  us  have  what 
we  require  at  a lower  price  than  the  real  value ; in  the  sale 
of  a fowl  for  two  rials,  the  seller  must  be  a loser,  and  by  the 
same  rule  in  all  the  other  provisions ; thus  I command,  that 
for  less  than  three  rials  and  upwards,  no  fowl  shall  be  sold 
to  a soldier,  and  in  same  proportion  all  other  articles,  and  I 
give  my  solemn  word  and  honour  that  when  I leave  I will 
give  very  ample  satisfaction  and  reward  for  the  kindness 
you  have  shown,  and  intend  to  show  us.” 

The  inhabitants  saw  plainly  that  these  words  of  Aguirre 
were  false,  for  it  was  evident  that  his  acts  belied  his  words  ; 
it  was  of  little  use  to  raise  the  prices  of  the  various  articles, 
to  those  who  had  no  idea  of  paying  the  just  value,  or  who 
even  took  what  they  required,  without  payment  or  even  by 
force,  and  often  such  things  as  the  captains  and  soldiers 
had  no  use  for,  merely  to  do  evil  to  the  poor  inhabitants. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


127 


CHAP.  XXX. 

1.  Aguirre  Mils  one  of  his  captains.  Four  of  his  soldiers  desert. — 2.  Two 
of  the  deserters  found  ; Aguirre  orders  them  to  be  hung.  He  intends 
to  kill  a monk  of  the  order  of  Santo  Domingo. — 3.  Aguirre  informs 
his  soldiers  how  he  intends  to  'proceed  in  his  tyrannies. — 4.  He  places 
his  brigantines  with  their  bows  towards  the  shore,  fearing  that  his 
soldiers  might  desert ; and  he  destroys  the  houses  and  estates  of  an 
inhabitant , who  had  fled. 

1.  Aguirre  became  uneasy  and  fearful  of  one  Enriquez  de 
Orellana,  whom  he  had  made  captain  of  the  ammunition, 
and  this  without  more  cause  than  he  had  found  on  other 
occasions,  when  he  wished  to  destroy  any  on3 : even  if 
what  had  been  reported  to  Aguirre  was  true,  that  Orellana 
had  got  drunk,  on  the  day  they  came  to  Margarita.  However, 
true  or  not,  he  ordered  him  to  be  hung,  without  allow- 
ing him  to  confess,  although  he  begged  for  it.  Aguirre  gave 
the  command  of  the  ammunition  to  one  Anton  Llamoso, 
who  had  been  sergeant  of  his  guard,  and  so  faithful  was 
he  to  Aguirre,  that  he  held  the  post  until  the  death  of  the 
tyrant. 

Some  of  the  soldiers  saw  how  insecure  their  lives  were, 
for  when  they  appeared  to  be  in  the  greatest  favour  with 
Aguirre,  he,  on  the  most  trivial  suspicion,  made  away  with 
them ; so  they  bethought  them  how  to  escape  from  him. 
They  were  delayed  in  their  project,  seeing  that  the  island 
was  so  small,  and  so  well  known  to  the  inhabitants,  whom 
Aguirre  had  so  subjected,  that  he  would  oblige  them,  under 
the  severest  penalties,  to  search  out  and  capture  the 
soldiers,  when  they  were  missed ; also  that  day  and  night, 
their  chief  was  most  vigilant  with  his  guards  and  sentinels, 
placed  everywhere  in  the  town,  and  on  the  roads  leading  from 
it,  so  that  it  was  next  to  impossible  to  escape  with  safety. 
However,  with  all  these  difficulties  in  sight,  they  determined 


128 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


to  try ; so  four  soldiers,  two  and  two,  named  Francisco  Vas- 
quez,  Gonzalo  de  Zuniga,  J uan  de  Villatoro,  and  Luis 
Sanchez  del  Castillo,  at  a certain  hour  of  the  night,  fled 
from  the  city. 

When  this  was  known  to  Aguirre,  he  was  furious  and 
raved  like  a madman,  foaming  at  the  mouth  with  rage  and 
passion,  for  he  believed  that  if  he  did  not  give  himself  up  to 
such  like  demonstrations,  and  give  peremptory  orders  to 
find  them,  all  his  men  would  desert  and  leave  him. 

He  instantly  commanded  that  the  strictest  search  might 
be  made  by  the  inhabitants,  against  whom  (so  that  it  should 
be  the  more  effective)  and  against  the  governor  and  the  rest 
whom  he  had  in  confinement,  he  spoke  most  ferociously, 
and,  with  a thousand  bitter  oaths,  told  them  that  they  had 
secreted  his  soldiers,  and  consequently  knew  where  they 
were ; and  that  if  they  had  not,  the  men  were  on  the 
island,  and  could  not  escape  from  it ; and  if  they  did  not 
wish  to  see  the  entire  destruction  of  the  island,  they  would 
go  and  find  the  deserters  ; and,  independently  of  giving  him 
the  greatest  pleasure,  he  promised  to  give  two  hundred 
dollars  reward  for  bringing  to  him  each  of  the  four  soldiers. 

2.  He,  moreover,  threatened  to  execute  the  governor,  if 
he  did  not  issue  his  mandate  to  find  the  soldiers.  This  the 
governor  had  to  do,  knowing  that  the  tyrant  was  as  good  as 
his  word,  or  even  more  so.  Aguirre  sent  in  search  of  the 
deserters,  with  certain  of  the  inhabitants  who  knew  the 
country,  some  soldiers  who  had  recently  joined  him,  and 
also  some  of  his  Maranones. 

Some  in  fear  of  Aguirre’s  vengeance,  others  in  the  hope 
of  reward,  after  much  search,  found  Juan  de  Villatoro  and 
Luis  Sanchez,  who,  when  they  were  brought  into  the  pre- 
sence of  the  tyrant  (without  allowing  them  confession),  were 
immediately  hung  ; and  Aguirre  reproached  them  with  fero- 
city, whilst  they  were  being  executed,  for  having  intended  to 
return  to  the  service  of  the  king.  In  confirmation  of  what 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


129 


he  uttered,  after  they  were  dead,  he  commanded  that  an  in- 
scription should  be  put  over  each,  with  these  words:  “ These 
men  have  been  executed,  because  they  were  faithful  vassals  of 
the  king  of  Castille.”  Then,  with  his  serpent’s  tongue,  he 
said  over  the  dead  bodies  : “ Let  us  now  see  if  the  king  of 
Castille  will  give  you  life  again.” 

In  sight  of  such  proceedings  against  the  two  soldiers, 
many  who  were  thinking  of  deserting,  were  shaken  in  their 
resolve  and  began  to  vacillate,  fearing  similar  punishment. 

Whilst  the  execution  was  going  on,  a monk  of  the  order 
of  Santo  Domingo  passed  the  spot,  and  when  Aguirre  per- 
ceived him,  he  ordered  him  to  be  killed ; which  would  have 
been  done,  had  not  the  inhabitants  who  were  present,  suc- 
ceeded by  their  prayers  and  intreaties  in  saving  his  life. 
For  a time  the  monk  was  spared,  but  shortly  he  fell  a vic- 
tim, as  we  shall  see. 

3.  When  Aguirre  was  not  occupied  in  these  cruelties,  or  in 
designing  them,  he  Ynade  known  to  his  soldiers  the  sort  of 
justice  (or  rather  injustice)  he  intended  to  deal  out ; pro- 
mising himself  that  he  would  succeed  in  all  he  intended,  by 
reason  of  the  good  principles  he  had  inculcated  in  that 
island ; and  thus  he  told  them  repeatedly  the  manner  he 
intended  to  command,  and  to  dispose  of  affairs. 

He  said  that  one  of  the  most  necessary  proceedings  for  the 
well-being  and  preservation  of  the  Indies,  was  to  cut  the 
throats  of  all  the  monks  they  fell  in  with,  of  the  orders  of  San 
Francisco  and  Santo  Domingo,  also  those  of  the  other  orders, 
excepting  the  Mercedarios.  He  said  that  the  monks  dis- 
turbed the  liberty  that  was  necessary  for  the  soldiers,  for 
their  conquests,  and  the  subjection  of  the  natives.  Then  he 
declared  that  he  would  execute,  with  cruel  torments,  all 
bishops,  viceroys,  presidents,  oidores,1  governors,  lawyers, 
and  procuradores,  who  came  in  his  way,  for  that  all  these  per- 
sons hadentirely  destroyed  the  Indies.  After  these,  he  thought 
1 Auditors  or  judges  of  the  Royal  Audiences. 

s 


130 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


of  destroying  all  the  Caballeros  of  noble  blood,  because  they 
were  likewise  opposed,  as  a matter  of  duty,  to  the  vices  of  the 
common  soldiers.  After  these  he  would  destroy,  without 
sparing  one,  all  public  women,  and  even  those  who  were 
not  chaste  ; having  come  to  this  determination  by  the  hatred 
he  felt  for  Doha  Inez  de  Atienza  (for  we  have  seen  that  she  was 
of  this  last  class),  on  account  of  the  many  troubles  she  had 
caused  him.  It  was  not  likely  that  these  were  mere  words, 
for,  during  his  tyrannous  lifetime,  he  executed  all  who  came 
within  his  grasp  ; for  he  was  the  cause  of  the  death  of  his 
governor  Pedro  de  Ursua;  after  that  of  Don  Fernando;  then  a 
priest  was  his  victim;  then  Doha  Inez,  and  many  others;  he 
was  also  the  murderer  of  monks;  of  the  governor  of  Margarita, 
as  we  shall  see;  of  an  alcalde,  and  of  a regidor;  and  if  he  did 
not  cause  more  deaths,  it  was  because  he  had  not  the  oppor- 
tunity. 

Similar  feelings  were  entertained  by  many  of  his  soldiers, 
if  only  to  follow  his  execrable  example.  Some  time  was 
passed  in  these  councils,  and  also  in  boasting,  in  mustering 
his  forces,  and  instructing  them  in  the  art  and  subtleties  of 
war,  which  they  were  to  employ  in  the  attack,  retreat,  and 
defence,  letting  them  know  that  he  did  not  intend  to  give 
battle  to  any  captain  sent  against  him,  excepting  to  the  king 
in  person,  because,  as  to  all  the  rest,  he  intended  to  rout  them 
by  his  stratagems,  and  knowledge  of  the  art  of  war. 

4.  Until  he  received  the  news  of  what  had  occurred  in 
Maracapana,  to  those  he  had  sent  to  take  the  provincial’s 
ship,  although  some  time  had  passed,  he  did  not  consider  it  a 
great  delay,  feeling  confident  that  the  ship  would  be  brought 
to  him.  But  he  still  distrusted  the  faithfulness  of  his 
soldiers,  and  feared  that  they  might  become  disgusted 
with  the  life  they  led,  and  might  take  possession  of  the  bri- 
gantines (or  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Margarita  might  do 
the  same),  and,  running  away  with  them,  give  information 
against  him.  He,  therefore,  had  the  brigantines  placed  with 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


131 


their  bows  in  shore,  intending,  in  case  the  ship  of  the  pro- 
vincial did  not  arrive,  to  hurry  on  the  completion  of  another 
that  was  building  in  the  port,  and  thus  leave  the  island. 

At  this  time  an  inhabitant  of  the  city,  named  Alonzo  Perez 
de  Aguilar,  not  liking  the  neighbourhood  of  Aguirre,  laid 
his  plans  for  escaping  from  the  town,  and  afterwards  from 
the  island  ; and,  although  Aguirre  used  every  means,  in  the 
hope  of  arresting  him,  Aguilar  escaped.  The  traitor,  not 
being  able  to  have  his  person,  vented  his  tiger’s  rage  upon 
the  houses  belonging  to  Aguilar.  He  went,  accompanied  by 
some  of  his  satellites,  to  destroy  the  houses,  as  if  they  had 
been  the  property  of  a traitor  to  his  king ; he  caused  them 
to  be  pillaged,  unroofed,  and  then  levelled  to  the  ground,  so 
that  there  was  not  one  stone  upon  another,  and  strewed  the 
ground  with  salt : this  vile  spirit  also  caused  the  slaying  of 
the  cattle,  the  destruction  of  the  estates,  lands,  and  all  he 
could  find  belonging  to  Aguilar. 


CHAP.  XXXI. 

1.  Aguirre  kills  a captain,  named  Juan  de  Turriaga , and  buries  him 
with  pomp. — 2.  Aguirre  threatens  the  people  of  Margarita  with  his 
vengeance , in  case  the  provincial  of  Santo  Domingo  takes  his  men 
in  Maracapana. — 3.  The  provincial's  ship  is  seen  making  for  the 
island , the  traitor  prepares  for  defence. — 4.  Aguirre , observing  that 
the  provincial's  ship  had  anchored ’,  puts  the  inhabitants  into  the  fort 
as  prisoners , and  determines  to  kill  the  governor , and  his  companions. 

1.  Aguirre  had  not  recovered  from  the  rage  in  which  he 
had  perpetrated  his  last  horrors,  when  it  was  augmented  on 
his  being  informed  that  one  of  his  captains,  named  Juan  de 
Turriaga,  had  shown  himself  friendly  to  the  soldiers,  by 
having  some  poor  men  at  his  table,  who  held  him  in  great 
respect,  for  his  goodness  of  disposition.  As  flowers  are 
rendered  poisonous  by  the  pestilential  spider,  so  Aguirre 


132 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


said  of  this  captain  that  he  was  his  enemy,  and  acted  in  this 
friendly  way  to  the  poor  men,  in  order  to  make  a party,  with 
the  object  of  killing  him.  Aguirre,  having  made  up  his 
mind,  doomed  Turriaga,  and,  to  strike  terror  into  the  hearts 
of  soldiery  and  people,  he  arranged  that  Turriaga  should 
die.  He  delegated  this  bloody  act  to  his  maestro  del  campo, 
Martin  Perez,  as  a faithful  satellite  to  his  tyrant  chief. 
Perez  selected  some  of  his  friends  among  the  soldiers,  who, 
with  arquebuses  and  other  arms,  went  stealthily  one  night  to 
Turriaga’s  quarters,  whom  they  found  at  evening  meal  with 
some  of  his  comrades.  Turriaga,  on  seeing  Martin  Perez 
enter,  rose  from  table,  to  receive  him  with  the  honour  due  to 
his  rank,  as  maestro  del  campo.  Turriaga  had  scarcely  un- 
covered himself,  bowing  and  approaching  Perez,  when  the 
arquebuses  were  discharged  at  Turriaga  by  some,  then 
others  rushed  at  him  with  their  lances  and  swords,  when  he 
fell  to  the  ground,  dead,  bathed  in  his  own  blood.  The 
murderers  then  sallied  out  of  the  house,  communicating  to 
Aguirre  that  his  enemy  was  no  more. 

Early  the  next  morning  Aguirre  (for  Turriaga  was  a 
Biscayan,  like  himself,  and  he  wished  to  show  respect  to  one 
who  had  followed  and  served  him)  gave  orders  that  he  should 
be  buried  with  all  pomp,  as  it  is  the  custom  to  bury  cap- 
tains, and  other  distinguished  soldiers.  Aguirre  himself  was 
present  at  the  funereal  honours,  with  his  troops,  showing  all 
the  signs  of  mourning,  with  arms  trailing,  and  muffled  drums. 
It  was  the  opinion  of  the  better  portion  of  the  soldiery  that 
the  tyrant  Aguirre  had  killed  this  captain  more  because  he 
was  a good,  affable,  and  generous  man,  than  for  any  reason 
he  had  to  suspect  him  in  any  way. 

2.  The  tyrant  began  to  be  anxious  about  the  delay  of 
Monguia  with  the  provincial’s  ship  from  the  port  of  Mara- 
capana,  for  already  many  more  days  had  passed  than  he  had 
given  him.  He  imagined  that  the  provincial  had  killed 
Monguia,  or  had  imprisoned  him  and  his  party.  These 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


133 


thoughts  changed  his  previous  feelings  of  joy,  that  he  should 
take  the  provincial’s  ship,  into  sadness.  His  suspicions 
caused  him  to  bellow  out  his  ungovernable  rage  with 
horrible  threats,  saying  to  his  soldiers  and  the  inhabitants, 
that  if  that  friar  (the  provincial)  had  imprisoned  or  killed 
his  people,  he  would  resort  to  unheard  of  modes  of  vengeance, 
slaying,  with  every  species  of  cruelty  that  could  be  thought  of, 
all  the  men  and  women  in  that  part  of  the  country  (yet,  even 
if  this  act  had  been  committed,  they  were  not  culpable) ; 
he  would  not  even  spare  the  child  at  the  breast,  but  would 
wash  the  public  places  and  streets  with  their  blood,  also 
that  the  water  courses  of  the  city  of  Margarita  should  run 
with  blood : after  which,  not  one  stone  should  be  left  stand- 
ing on  another,  all  the  houses  should  be  burnt,  a thousand 
monks  should  be  sacrificed,  with  the  most  painful  deaths ; 
and  if  the  provincial,  the  Friar  Francisco  Montesinos,  fell  into 
his  hands,  he  would  flay  him  alive,  and  make  a drum  of  his 
skin,  as  an  example  to  all.  This  wicked  one  also  ordained 
that  after  death  he  should  be  flayed,  and  that  a drum  should 
be  made  of  his  skin,  in  the  wars  of  heretics  against  catholics. 
These  and  other  threats,  with  the  acts  he  consummated, 
rendered  the  poor  inhabitants  of  Margarita  very  sorrowful, 
so  that  they  looked  upon  their  lives  as  not  worth  a maravedi, 
and  felt  their  condition  to  be  hopeless  when  they  saw  the 
tyrant’s  ferocious  countenance,  the  violent  movements  of  his 
person,  stamping  on  the  ground,  and  foaming  at  the  mouth, 
when  he  spoke  to  them.  All  that  he  said  met  with  the  ap- 
probation of  his  captains  and  soldiers. 

3.  Such  was  the  terrible  situation  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Margarita,  after  the  provincial  had  left  Maracapana  in  his 
ship,  and  had  given  information  along  all  the  coast  of  Cu- 
mana,  in  the  port  of  our  Lady  of  Caravalleda,  two  leagues 
to  the  east  of  the  port  of  the  country  of  Caraccas,  called 
La  Guayra,  and  in  the  port  of  Burburata.  The  pro- 
vincial then  returned  to  Maracapana,  and  to  the  island  of 


134 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Margarita,  with  the  intention  of  trying  his  fortune,  and  see- 
ing if  he  and  his  followers  could  not  defeat  the  tyrant. 
When  his  ship  was  seen  in  the  distance,  from  the  city  of 
Margarita,  as  if  coming  from  the  port  of  Burburata,  the 
news  was  given  to  Aguirre,  who  thought  the  ship  was  being 
brought  to  him  as  a prize.  This  calmed  the  fury  he  was  in, 
in  some  measure,  and  mitigated  the  terror  of  the  inhabitants, 
for  they  feared  the  tyrant  would  put  his  dreadful  threats 
into  execution  upon  mere  suspicion  only. 

At  that  time  a piragua,  with  a negro  from  Maracapana, 
entered  the  port  of  the  city  (which  was  then  near  the  shore, 
although  afterwards  the  city  was  removed  three  leagues 
inland,  where  it  now  is),  bringing  news  to  Aguirre  of  all 
that  had  happened  there  to  his  soldiers,  and  that  his  men, 
with  others  brought  by  the  provincial,  had  come  to  attack 
him.  On  hearing  this  news,  his  fury  was  redoubled,  and  he 
added  to  former  threats,  others  more  terrible,  against  the  pro- 
vincial and  his  followers.  He  began  to  put  these  threats  into 
execution  before  the  ship  anchored, by  seizing  the  inhabitants, 
their  wives  and  children,  imprisoning  them  in  the  fort, 
putting  the  greater  number  in  irons,  and  doubling  those  of 
Juan  de  Villandrando,  and  others  who  were  already  in  prison. 
He  repeated  to  these  unfortunate  persons  how  he  intended 
to  serve  them,  and  that  the  water-courses  of  the  town 
should  run  with  blood. 

The  provincial’s  ship  was  now  nearing  the  island,  and, 
judging  from  the  course  it  was  steering,  Aguirre  was  told 
it  would  go  into  a place  five  leagues  distant  from  the  city, 
known  as  Puerto  de  Piedras. 

4.  With  this  information,  and  having  the  ship  in  sight, 
the  tyrant  put  himself  on  the  defensive.  He  also  caused 
horsemen  to  be  placed  at  certain  distances,  from  the  city 
to  Puerto  de  Piedras,  so  that  when  the  ship  came  to  anchor, 
they  should  make  signs  one  to  another,  and  he  would  thus 
be  informed  without  loss  of  time.  That  he  might  not  be  in 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


135 


want  of  officers  to  accompany  him,  when  he  went  in  person 
to  the  defence  of  Puerto  de  Piedras,  he  gave  the  post  of 
alferez-general  to  Alonso  de  Villena,  who  held  that  appoint- 
ment under  Don  Fernando. 

The  spies,  like  true  traitors,  shortly  made  it  known  to  the 
tyrant  that  the  provincial’s  ship  had  anchored  in  Puerto  de 
Piedras.  This  was  not  pleasant  information  for  Aguirre, 
but  he  began  to  arm  his  men,  to  go  against  the  friar ; and 
such  was  his  rage,  that  pious  Catholic  ears  were  horrified  at 
his  blasphemous  and  heretical  words.  When  all  was  ready 
to  march  to  the  front,  a most  barbarous  thought  came  upon 
him,  so  as  to  terrify  his  soldiers  afresh,  and  force  them  to 
follow  him,  and  thus  prevent  their  desertion  to  the  king’s 
side.  It  was  as  follows  (and  not  without  the  concurrence  of 
the  more  wickedly  intentioned  of  his  captains  and  soldiers), 
that  before  they  went,  they  should  kill  the  governor,  the 
alcalde  Manuel  Rodriguez,  the  alguazil  mayor  Cosme  de 
Leon,  one  Caceres  the  regidor,  and  one  Juan  Rodriguez,  a 
servant  of  the  governor’s,  who  were  in  prison.  This  vile  act 
having  been  determined  on,  that  very  night,  when  all  the 
lights  of  the  town  were  extinguished,  he  ordered  these  pri- 
soners, who  were  confined  high  up  in  a room  in  the  fortress, 
to  come  down  to  a saloon.  The  prisoners  suspected  his  vile 
object,  and  death-like  was  their  fear ; which,  being  perceived 
by  Aguirre  (who  always  liked  to  be  present  at  these  scenes), he 
began  to  console  them  with  feigned  words,  telling  them  to 
have  no  fear;  that  if  there  were  any  among  them  who  cared  for 
his  life,  and  had  faith  in  what  he  promised,  he  would  give  his 
word,  that  although  the  friar  had  with  him  as  many  trees 
and  thistles  as  there  were  on  the  island  (for  the  island  was 
full  of  such,  and  very  prickly,  as  I can  well  vouch  for),  and 
they  fought  against  him,  and  if  in  the  battle  all  his  com- 
panions were  slain,  none  of  those  he  had  as  prisoners  should 
suffer;  or  be  in  any  danger. 


136 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


CHAP.  XXXII. 

1.  Aguirre  arranges  for  the  execution  of  the  governor  and  his  companions 
in  captivity . — 2.  They  kill  the  governor  and  his  companions.  Aguirre 
summons  his  soldiers  to  see  the  dead  bodies , and  makes  his  observa- 
tions upon  the  matter. — 3.  He  explains , and  gives  his  reasons  for 
their  death. — 4.  Aguirre  orders  the  bodies  to  be  buried , and  sends 
the  inhabitants  back  to  prison.  He  leaves  his  maestro  del  campo  in 
charge  of  the  city , and  then  sallies  forth  against  the  provincial. 

1.  The  prisoners  were  slightly  consoled  by  Aguirre’s 
words,  although  the  very  reverse  succeeded  as  to  anything 
in  their  favour  ; for  he  was  a false  traitor,  and  never  kept  his 
word,  and  if  he  did  anything,  it  was  the  very  reverse  of 
what  he  promised,  as  we  shall  see  in  what  happened  con- 
cerning the  prisoners.  He  caused  the  rest  of  the  inhabit- 
ants, and  their  families,  to  leave  the  fortress,  so  that  they 
might  have  no  idea  of  his  designs.  It  is  said  that  the  prin- 
cipal mover  in  this  affair  was  a soldier,  one  Gonzalo  Her- 
nandez, a Portuguese,  a friend  of  Aguirre’s,  who  informed 
the  traitor  that  Don  Juan  and  the  other  prisoners  were  con- 
spiring against  him,  and  that  they  had  sent  messengers  and 
arquebusses  to  the  provincial,  begging  of  him  to  land  his 
people,  and  give  Aguirre  battle. 

The  traitor  (irritated  by  what  the  Portuguese  said  to  him), 
and  fearing  the  provincial,  thought  that  it  was  not  good  policy 
to  leave  enemies  in  the  rear,  although  they  were  prisoners, 
so  he  determined  to  kill  them  before  he  left  the  city,  and  thus 
to  meet  his  ecclesiastical  foe,  a warlike  churchman.  It  was 
nearly  midnight,  and  the  hour  for  such  deeds,  when  he 
ordered  one  Francisco  de  Carrion,  a mestizo,  his  alguazil,  to 
go  quickly  with  certain  soldiers,  and  strangle  the  governor, 
and  his  imprisoned  companions,  who  were  in  the  lower 
apartment.  This  alguazil,  and  his  men,  lost  no  time  in 
obeying  the  traitor’s  wishes ; they  quickly  got  hold  of  some 
negroes,  cords,  and  other  articles  necessary  for  perpetrating 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


137 


the  deed,  and,  descending  to  the  lower  apartment,  they  told 
the  prisoners  to  pray  to  God  for  his  mercy,  and  to  show 
such  contrition  for  their  sins  as  became  Christians,  for  that 
they  were  about  to  die. 

2.  The  governor’s  expectation  that  Aguirre  would  keep 
his  word  (in  a matter  of  such  gravity)  gave  him  confidence 
that  the  traitor  would  not  break  it,  nor  cut  short  his  days  so 
soon : and  he  replied  by  asking  what  this  meant,  for  that 
only  a short  time  since  the  general  had  left  them,  and  had 
given  them  his  word,  not  only  that  they  should  not  be 
killed,  but  that  no  harm  should  come  to  them.  The  alguazil, 
and  his  men  said,  notwithstanding  what  had  been  told  them, 
that  they  must  die,  and  advised  them  to  pray  to  God,  which 
was  what  they  ought  to  do. 

The  unfortunate  prisoners  did  so,  seeing  that  the  bloody 
business  was  about  to  take  place,  and  with  greater  speed 
than  was  necessary  ; for  these  ministers  of  wickedness  began 
by  strangling  the  governor,  after  him  the  alcalde  Manuel 
Rodriguez,  then  the  alguazil  Don  Cosme,  who  was  crippled 
in  his  hands  and  feet.  The  bodies  were  then  laid  together, 
and  covered  with  some  mats  so  as  to  hide  them,  when  the 
murderers  went  up  stairs  to  where  Aguirre  was,  and,  having 
given  an  account  of  what  they  had  done,  they  showed 
demonstrations  of  pleasure,  as  if  what  they  had  done  had 
been  for  the  service  of  God. 

As  it  was  near  the  middle  of  the  night,  the  traitor  con- 
sidered it  would  be  as  well  to  inform  his  soldiery  of  what  had 
taken  place  ; so  he  called  his  men  into  the  lower  room,  where 
the  dead  bodies  were,  and,  by  the  light  of  many  candles,  he 
ordered  the  mats  to  be  raised.  The  bodies  were  exposed, 
and  he,  pointing  to  the  corpses,  spoke  thus : 

“Well  do  you  see,  O Maranones  ! in  the  bodies  now 
before  your  eyes,  that,  independently  of  the  crimes  you 
committed  in  the  river  Maranon,  by  slaying  your  governor 
Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  his  lieutenant  Don  Juan  de  Vargas,  by 

T 


138 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


making  a prince  of  Don  Fernando,  and  giving  your  oath  of 
allegiance  to  him  as  such,  you  have  divested  yourselves  of  all 
rights  in  the  kingdom  of  Castille,  you  have  forsworn  alle- 
giance to  the  king  Don  Philip,  by  swearing  to  make  per- 
petual war  upon  him,  and  you  have  signed  your  names 
to  the  act.  You  afterwards  added  crime  to  crime ; you 
executed  your  own  prince  and  lord,  many  captains  and 
soldiers,  a priest,  and  a noble  lady ; and,  having  arrived  at 
this  island,  you  have  forcibly  taken  possession  of  it,  divid- 
ing the  property  found  in  it  amongst  yourselves,  that  which 
belonged  to  the  king  Don  Philip,  as  well  as  that  of  indi- 
viduals. You  have  destroyed  the  books  of  the  treasury,  and 
committed  sundry  and  divers  wickednesses.  Now  you  have 
killed  another  governor,  an  alcalde,  a regidor,  an  alguazil 
mayor,  as  well  as  other  persons,  whose  bodies  you  now  have 
before  your  eyes. 

“ So  now  you  must  open  your  eyes,  and  see  each  for  him- 
self. Be  not  deceived  by  any  vain  confidence ; for  having 
committed  so  many,  and  such  grave  and  atrocious  crimes, 
be  ye  sure  that  ye  are  not  safe  in  any  part  of  the  world, 
excepting  with  me  ; for  supposing  the  king  were  to  pardon 
you,  the  relations  and  friends  of  the  dead  would  follow  you, 
and  take  vengeance.  Thus  I counsel  you  not  to  leave  me,  to 
sell  your  lives  dearly  when  the  occasion  offers,  and  to  let  all 
be  of  one  mind  ; for  against  such  a union,  all  the  force  that 
may  be  sent  against  you  will  be  of  little  avail.  Let  each 
man  mark  well  what  I have  said,  for  it  is  a question  of  life 
and  death.” 

4.  As  soon  as  his  speech  was  finished,  he  ordered  that  two 
graves  should  be  made,  and  the  bodies  were  buried  therein. 
In  order  that  the  inhabitants  might  not  have  one  peaceful 
night  in  their  houses,  he  commanded  (for  it  was  now  about 
two  in  the  morning)  that  their  wives  and  children  should  be 
thrust  into  the  fortress,  to  their  great  fear  and  affliction,  and 
he  had  them  secured  as  they  had  previously  been.  They 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


139 


had  their  suspicions  as  to  what  had  taken  place,  and  that 
Don  Juan  de  Villandrando  and  his  companions  had  been 
killed,  although  Aguirre  and  his  followers  denied  what  they 
had  done.  The  traitor  left  the  prisoners  in  the  fortress,  in 
charge  of  his  maestro  del  campo  Martin  Perez,  and,  at  day- 
break, he  marched  with  eighty  arquebusiers  to  Punta  de 
Piedras,  where  the  provincial  had  anchored. 

Martin  Perez,  with  the  Maranones  who  had  been  left  to 
guard  the  fortress  and  town,  caused  a feast  to  be  made  that 
day,  when  Aguirre  departed,  which  was  on  a Sunday.  They 
had  his  tables  spread  with  great  show  and  profusion,  the 
transports  blew  joyous  blasts,  the  generous  wine  ran  freely, 
which  made  them  talk  merrily,  and  excuse  themselves  for 
what  had  been  done.  But  this,  as  will  be  seen,  cost  the 

life  of  the  maestro  del  campo. 

* 


CHAP.  XXXIII. 

1.  The  'people  of  the  port  of  Burburata  send  tidings  to  the  governor  of 
Venezuela,  and  to  the  cities  of  his  government,  and  that  of  Merida, 
concerning  the  acts  of  the  traitor. — 2.  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina  sends 
information  to  the  Royal  Audience  of  Santa  Fe,  and  to  the  other 
cities  on  the  road. — 3.  Preparations  are  made  by  Pedro  Bravo  de  la 
Molina,  in  the  city  of  Merida,  to  resist  the  traitor,  if  necessary. — 
4.  The  licenciate,  Pablo  Collado,  is  not  unmindful  of  his  duties , 
in  the  towns  under  his  government. 

1.  The  padre  Fray  Francisco  Montesinos,  having  advised 
the  people  of  the  port  of  Burburata  as  to  Aguirre’s  doings, 
they  likewise  sent  on  the  news  to  the  towns  in  the  govern- 
ment of  Venezuela,  particularly  to  the  governor,  the 
licenciate  Pablo  Collado,  who  was  just  then  in  the  city  of 
Tocuyo,  and  who  sent  orders  to  the  men  of  Burburata  to 
send  their  wives  and  children  away,  as  well  as  their  property, 
in  case  Aguirre  should  come  there.  This  order  was  hardly 


140 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


necessary  for  the  men  of  Burburata,  seeing  that  they  were 
dwelling  on  the  sea-shore,  and  were  few  in  number,  without 
means  of  defence,  for  they  had,  already,  broken  up  their 
homes,  and  put  their  families  in  safety,  as  soon  as  they  re- 
ceived the  news  from  the  provincial,  the  men  returning 
to  the  port  of  Burburata.  The  governor  sent  advices  to 
the  city  of  Trujillo,  recently  settled  by  Captain  Diego 
Garcia  de  Paredes,  to  that  of  Merida,  also  a recently 
settled  jurisdiction,  governed  by  Captain  Pedro  Bravo  de  la 
Molina,  a man  of  noble  blood,  and  who  gave  proofs  of 
the  same  in  all  the  acts  of  his  life,  but  more  especially 
in  what  concerned  Aguirre. 

The  governor  of  Venezuela  ordered  both  cities  to  be  pre- 
pared for  defence  (as  it  was  reported  that  the  traitor  might 
pass  that  way),  begging  of  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina,  as  he 
was  out  of  his  jurisdiction,  to  have  all  the  soldiers  reacly 
that  he  could  possibly  get  together,  to  go  against  Aguirre, 
which  would  be  rendering  a service  to  God  as  well  as  to  the 
king,  and  to  the  governor  it  would  be  rendering  a great 
service ; and,  as  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes  was  in  that  city, 
retired  with  some  soldiers  who  had  separated  from  Collado’s 
jurisdiction,  on  account  of  certain  difficulties  they  had  had 
with  him  in  the  city  of  Trujillo,  shortly  after  Paredes  had 
settled  it,  he  begged  of  them  to  return  at  once  to  the  city  of 
Tocuyo  ; and  he  gave  them  his  solemn  word  of  honour  that 
no  more  should  be  said  relative  to  their  former  disagree- 
ments, but  that  he  would  be  thankful  to  them  for  their 
assistance,  seeing  that  he  was  menaced  by  the  traitor. 

2.  The  news  having  been  received  in  the  city  of  Merida 
by  the  governor,  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina,  in  the  month  of 
August,  1561,  he  immediately  appointed  certain  of  the 
citizens  of  that  place,  with  a captain,  to  go  to  the  town  of  San 
Cristoval  (to  which  place  it  was  not  possible  to  go  without  a 
strong  escort,  on  account  of  the  warlike  Indians  who  dwelt 
between  one  town  and  the  other,  in  the  valleys  of  the  Bayla- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


141 


dores  de  la  Guta,  Saint  Bartholomew,  and  other  parts),  to 
tell  them  the  news,  whence  it  could  be  sent  to  Tunja  and 
Santa  Fe  (Bogota)  to  the  Royal  Audience,  to  which  Molina 
wrote,  as  well  as  to  the  Governor  Pablo  Collado,  so  that  all 
the  cities  might  be  prepared  to  resist  the  traitor,  should 
he  enter  these  provinces.  This  being  done,  Pedro  Bravo 
busied  himself  in  making  arrangements  for  the  soldiers  and 
inhabitants,  whom  he  was  to  take  with  him  to  Venezuela,  com- 
municating to  them  his  plans  and  stratagems  of  war,  par- 
ticularly if  the  traitor  had  a large  force,  that  of  the  juris- 
diction of  Venezuela  being  small  to  resist  him.  The 
traitor  might  arrive  at  the  city  of  Merida,  where  it  was 
necessary  there  should  be  a guard  of  sturdy  men  (in  case 
they  should  be  obliged  to  go  to  Venezuela)  to  guard  that 
town  against  any  rising  that  might  occur  on  the  part  of  the 
natives,  for  the  country  had  but  lately  been  settled. 

S.  Molina  sent  some  soldiers  from  the  city,  to  be  on  the 
look-out  at  certain  distances  on  the  road,  and  the  post  from 
Trujillo  would  advise  him,  as  to  Aguirre’s  advance  and  in- 
tentions. He  also  ordered  that  some  soldiers  should  go  on- 
wards to  Tocuyo,  where  they  would  know  (because  there 
they  would  find  the  governor  in  person)  when  the  traitor 
might  land,  advising  the  governor,  Don  Pablo  Collado, 
not  to  diminish  his  force  in  sending  him  news,  for  that  he 
wanted  more  men  than  he  already  had. 

The  inhabitants  and  soldiers  of  Merida  were  perfectly 
agreed  (and  I make  this  distinction  because  in  these  lands 
we  call  vecinos,  those  settlers  or  inhabitants  of  the  towns 
who  have  encomiendas  of  Indians,  all  the  rest  being  tran- 
sient, and  called  soldiers),  and  were  of  one  mind,  that  their 
persons  and  property,  even  to  the  last  maravedi,  should  be 
placed  at  the  service  of  their  king  and  lord,  whereby  it  was 
well  known  to  the  world  what  loyal  vassals  the  sovereign  had, 
and  how  desirous  they  were  to  shed  their  blood  in  defence  of 
his  royal  crown,  especially  against  those  who  had  rebelled 
against  him. 


142 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Don  Pedro  Bravo  gave  sincere  thanks  to  all  the  in- 
habitants, on  his  own  part,  and  on  that  of  the  king. 

4.  During  this  time  the  governor  of  V enezuela  was  not  idle 
in  the  cities  of  Tocuyo  and  Barquisimeto,  doing  all  in  his 
power  to  protect  his  government ; for  it  was  apparent  to 
every  one  that  no  means  of  defence  should  be  omitted,  see- 
ing that  Aguirre  had  a large  number  of  wrell-armed  fol- 
lowers, and  that  the  numbers  of  the  royal  forces  were  small 
to  cope  with  him,  so  that  although  prepared,  they  were  in 
a state  of  consternation. 


CHAP.  XXXIV. 

1.  Preparations  ordered  by  the  Royal  Audience  of  Santa  Fe,  and  officers 
appointed. — 2.  Orders  are  issued  that  the  people  of  the  various  cities 
of  the  kingdom  shall  be  ready  for  all  exigencies , and  what  the  governor 
Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina  has  to  do  in  Merida. — 3.  The  governments 
of  Popayan , Santa  Martha , and  Carthagena , are  ordered  to  collect 
troops , and  various  opinions  as  to  sallying  forth  against  the  traitor. 
— 4.  Investigations  are  made , to  see  if  there  are , in  the  kingdom , 
any  soldiers  connected  with  the  Peruvian  mutineers.  The  royal  seal 
guarded  in  Santa  Fe. 

1.  It  was  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  September  of  the 
same  year,  1561,  when  the  news  arrived  at  the  city  and 
audience  of  Santa  Fe.  The  oidores  and  licenciados  Alonso 
de  Grageda,  Melchor  Perez  de  Arteaga,  Diego  de  Villa- 
franca,  and  Angulo  de  Castejon  were  there.  All  the  cities 
in  the  kingdom  were  in  great  commotion,  on  becoming  ac- 
quainted with  the  cruelties  committed  by  Aguirre,  as  well 
as  by  the  great  number  of  armed  followers  he  had  with  him; 
so  the  oidores,  without  leaving  anything  undone  to  put  a stop 
to  these  terrible  excesses  (for  all  this  tierrafirme  was  suffering 
on  account  of  the  rebellions  that  had  happened  in  various  parts 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


143 


of  Piru),  sent  to  all  the  cities  and  towns  of  the  andiencia  of  the 
new  kingdom,1  commanding  that  men  and  arms  should  be  in 
readiness,  appointing  as  captain-general  (in  case  it  should 
be  found  necessary  for  him  to  go  against  the  traitor)  the 
Mariscal  Don  Gonzalo  Ximenez  de  Quesada  (who  then  only 
had  this  title  and  was  regidor  of  the  city,  until  the  following 
year  of  1568,  when  he  received  the  title  of  adelantado  of  the 
new  kingdom),  a successful  and  valorous  personage,  and 
one  whom  the  whole  country  respected  for  these  qualities, 
and  because  he  had  discovered  and  conquered  the  country. 
Captain  Hernan  Vanegas  was  chosen  as  maestro  del 
campo,  a settler  of  the  city  of  Santa  Fe.  He  was  from  Cor- 
dova in  Spain,  a cavalier  of  high  standing  and  bravery,  of 
which  he  gave  many  proofs  in  the  conquest  of  Santa 
Martha,  and  in  his  discoveries  in  the  same  kingdom,  his 
conquests  over  the  Panches,  and  in  the  founding  of  the  city 
of  Tocayma. 

2.  For  captains  of  horse  were  nominated  Juan  de  Cespedes, 
an  inhabitant  of  Santa  Fe,  and  Gonzalo  Suarez  Rondon,  an 
inhabitant,  and  one  of  the  founders,  of  Tunja  ; as  captain  of 
infantry,  Juan  Ruiz  de  Orejuela  of  Santa  Fe,  but  originally 
from  Cordova  in  Castille,  all  conquistadores  and  founders  in 
the  new  kingdom,  as  was  also  Gonzalo  Rodriguez  de  Le- 
desma, native  of  Zamora  in  Spain,  who,  on  this  occasion,  was 
named  by  the  Royal  Audience  captain  of  the  guard  of  the 
royal  seal,  which  was  in  Santa  Fe. 

In  each  town  a captain  was  named  to  be  in  charge  of  men, 
arms,  and  horses,  so  as  to  be  in  readiness  if  wanted.  Letters 
of  thanks  were  sent  to  the  city  of  Merida,  for  the  information 
afforded  by  Captain  Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina,  and  abund- 
ance of  provisions  for  the  use  of  that  part  of  the  country, 
should  the  traitor  go  there.  The  people  of  Merida  were 
ordered  on  no  account  to  leave  the  city,  although  the  gover- 

1 The  kingdom  of  New  Granada,  then  governed  by  the  Andiencia  Real , 
consisting  of  a president,  and  four  oidores  or  judges. 


144 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


nor  of  Venezuela  should  send  for  help,  but  to  remain  with 
all  their  people,  advising  the  Royal  Audience,  by  the  post, 
of  all  the  news  that  came  to  them  respecting  the  landing  of 
Aguirre ; and  if  it  happened  (on  account  of  the  little  oppo- 
sition the  traitor  met  with  in  the  government  of  Vene- 
zuela) that  Aguirre  had  the  intention  of  passing  into  the 
kingdom  of  Santa  Fe  by  the  city  of  Merida,  they  were 
to  take  away  all  the  provisions  from  the  town  and  vicinity, 
and  abandon  it,  for  they  were  not  in  sufficient  numbers  to 
resist  the  army  he  had  under  his  command. 

S.  The  Royal  Audience  did  not  omit  to  advise  the  govern- 
ments of  Popayan,  Santa  Martha,  and  Carthagena,  command- 
ing their  respective  governors  to  be  in  readiness  with  their 
people,  should  help  be  required;  and  should  the  traitor  come 
into  their  governments,  to  do  their  utmost  against  him,  as 
became  loyal  vassals  of  the  king. 

All  the  cities  of  the  new  kingdom  having  collected  their 
men,  it  was  found  (leaving  a sufficient  number  to  protect  the 
towns  of  Santa  Fe,  Tunja,  Velez,  Pamplona,  Ybague, 
Tocayma,  Mariquita,  and  the  town  of  San  Cristoval)  that 
there  were  one  thousand  five  hundred  soldiers,  four  hun- 
dred pikemen,  more  than  two  hundred  arquebusiers,  and 
the  rest  rodeleros  (men  armed  with  shields),  and  horse- 
men, ready  and  well  found  for  the  field.  It  was  ordered 
that  the  people  of  each  town  should  be  practised  in  the 
art  of  war  weekly,  so  that  when  required,  they  might  be 
used  to  military  affairs.  All  this  being  done,  various 
opinions  were  expressed  by  the  several  officers  and  the  old 
soldiers  of  Santa  Fe  and  Tunja,  as  to  the  best  plan  of  pro- 
ceeding against  the  traitor,  when  the  time  came,  some  con- 
sidering that  the  surest  method  was  to  await  him  in  the 
rinon  (kidney)  of  the  kingdom,  in  the  province  of  the  city 
of  Tunja  towards  Pamplona,  where  he  would  enter  the 
settlements  and  vast  valleys  called  the  Zemiza,  because  it  was 
an  open  plain  country,  where  cavalry  could  act  and  provi- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


145 


sions  were  abundant ; that  neither  one  nor  both  of  the 
oidores  should  be  absent,  so  that  the  Audiencia  should  be 
there,  representing  the  person  of  the  king. 

Others  considered  the  best  plan  would  be  that  the  captain- 
general  with  his  men  (it  not  being  necessary  that  any  of  the 
oidores  should  be  of  the  party)  should  march  to  Pamplona, 
wait  for  Aguirre  between  that  town  and  San  Cristoval,  in 
the  valley  of  Cucuta,  and  give  him  battle  in  the  open  coun- 
try ; for  the  traitor  and  his  army  would  necessarily  arrive 
fatigued  and  worn,  having  had  to  march  over  a very  heavy 
country,  and  thus  there  were  hopes  of  defeating  him. 

These  discussions  rose  to  such  a pitch,  and  each  party 
so  loudly  sustained  its  views,  that  it  was  feared  some  diffi- 
culties might  arise,  if  the  Royal  Audience  did  not  silence 
them  at  once,  by  informing  them  that  for  the  present  all  that 
was  required  was  that  they  should  be  merely  in  readiness. 
This  stopped  further  discussion,  but  no  expense  was  spared 
in  arranging  their  arms,  horses,  and  provisions,  neither  were 
splendid  dresses  and  adornments,  the  fruits  of  vanity,  for- 
gotten, which  are  the  usual  accompaniments  of  a military 
life,  in  which  the  greater  portion  of  their  own  money  was 
expended,  for  the  king  did  not  give  them  a maravedi.1 

1 The  poet  Don  Alonzo  de  Ercilla,  the  author  of  the  Araucana,  and 
one  with  whom  “ Spanish  poetical  genius  and  heroism  were  one  feeling,” 
heard  of  the  atrocities  of  Aguirre  at  Lima,  after  he  had  left  Chile.  He 
at  once  determined  to  go  against  the  traitor,  but  arrived  too  late  to 
share  in  the  operations  which  led  to  Aguirre’s  overthrow. 

In  Canto  xxxvi,  part  ii,  of  the  Araucana,  he  says, — • 

“ Costa  a costa,  y a veces  engolfado 
Llegue  al  Callao  de  Lima  celebrado. 

Estuve  alii  hasta  tanto  que  la  entrada 
Por  el  gran  Maranon  hizo  la  gente, 

Donde  Lope  de  Aguirre  en  la  jornada 
Mas  que  Neron  y Herodes  inclemente 
Paso  tantos  amigos  por  la  espada, 

Y a la  querida  hija  juntamente, 

No  por  otra  razo  y causa  alguna — 

Mas  de  para  morir  juntos  a una. 


U 


146 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


4.  It  was  considered  of  no  little  importance  to  make  care- 
ful inquiries  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  new  kingdom,  to 
see  if  there  were  any  soldiers  who  had  been  concerned  in 
the  rebellions  in  Peru  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Francisco  Her- 
nandez Giron,  Alvaro  de  Oyon,1  and  other  turbulent  men, 
so  as  to  keep  a watch  over  them : for  it  was  to  be  supposed 
that  they  had  not  forgotten  their  evil  inclinations,  and  would 
rather  join  the  traitor  Aguirre,  than  the  king’s  party. 

During  the  time  that  these  suspicions  and  fears  of  the 
traitor  continued  in  the  New  Kingdom  (which  was  from  the 
period  when  they  first  received  the  information,  to  Christmas 
of  that  same  year,  when  the  news  they  desired  came  to  them, 
that  the  traitor’s  army  had  been  destroyed,  and  himself 
killed  in  the  city  of  Barquisimeto),  every  night  thirty  armed 
men  guarded  the  Seal  of  the  Royal  Audience,  under  com- 
mand of  Captain  Ledesma.2 

Y aunque  mas  de  dos  mil  millas  havia 
De  camino  por  partes  despoblado, 

Luego  de  alii  por  mar  tomd  la  via 
A mas  larga  carrera  acostumbrado, 

Ya  Panama  llegue,  do  el  mismo  dia 
La  nueva  por  el  ayre  avia  llegado 
Del  desbarate  y nucerte  del  tyrano, 

Saliendo  mi  trabajo  y priesa  envano.” 

Ercilla  was  then  aged  twenty-nine,  and  he  had  been  eight  years  in 
America.  After  a long  illness  in  Tierra  Firme,  he  returned  to  Spain  in 
1562. 

1 A soldier  who,  a short  time  before,  had  excited  a revolt  in  Popavan. 

2 The  seal  of  the  Royal  Audience  was  received  at  Bogota,  in  the 
same  way  as  if  it  had  been  the  king  of  Spain  himself.  It  is  of  silver, 
and  very  large,  and  is  now  deposited  in  the  National  Museum,  at  Bogota. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


147 


CHAP.  XXXV. 

1.  Aguirre  marches  with  his  soldiers  to  Punta  de  Piedras,  whence  he 
returns  to  the  city.  He  is  told  unfavourable  things  of  his 
maestro  del  campo. — 2.  Aguirre  has  his  maestro  del  campo  Tcilled 
in  the  fortress.  Some  prisoners  escape. — 3.  A horrible  thing 
occurs  to  one  Llamoso , relative  to  the  body  of  the  maestro  del 
campo. — 4.  The  Marahones  and  soldiers  of  the  provincial  see  one 
another. 

1.  Aguirre,  with  his  eighty  well-armed  soldiers  in  good 
order  for  battle,  left  Margarita  for  Punta  de  Piedras,  and, 
having  arrived  there,  discovered  that  the  provincial  had  set 
sail,  and  was  steering  towards  the  city.  Aguirre  marched 
back  as  quick  as  he  could,  so  as  to  arrive  before  the  ship, 
and  be  fully  prepared  for  his  enemy.  The  maestro  del 
campo  Martin  Perez,  hearing  of  Aguirre's  return,  went  out 
to  meet  him,  with  the  arquebusiers  who  had  remained  with 
him,  and  gave  him  a grand  salute  and  joyous  reception. 
They  embraced  each  other,  as  if  they  had  not  met  for  a long 
time,  entering  arm  in  arm  into  the  fortress,  where  Aguirre 
found  the  same  order  amongst  the  imprisoned  inhabitants, 
as  when  he  had  departed. 

One  of  his  captains  of  infantry,  named  Christoval  Garcia, 
who  had  been  a caulker,  either  from  the  enmity  he  bore  the 
maestro  del  campo,  or  because  he  desired  to  have  his  post, 
succeeded  in  discrediting  him  with  Aguirre  ; for,  knowing 
his  chief’s  bitter  and  suspicious  disposition,  and  that  it  would 
require  but  little  to  get  him  on  bad  terms  with  the  maestro 
del  campo,  or  even  to  have  him  killed ; and  giving  a colour 
of  truth  to  his  malice,  by  an  appearance  of  zeal  for  the 
honour  of  his  general,  he  said  to  him  that  same  day,  that  the 
maestro  del  campo  harboured  much  evil  in  his  heart,  that  he 
had  asked  many  of  his  friends  to  kill  Aguirre  on  the  first 
opportunity,  and  to  take  the  men  and  ships  to  France,  for 


148 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


which  purpose  he  had  got  his  friends  together,  when  they 
agreed  to  carry  out  his  views  ; they  had  had  a great  feast 
in  the  fortress,  the  moment  Aguirre  had  left  for  Punta  de 
Piedras,  when  the  trumpets  and  arabales  played,  with  other 
signs  of  rejoicing.  He  supplicated  Aguirre  that  he  would 
look  to  this  matter,  and  not  allow  so  open  a treason  to  go 
further,  for  if  he  should  lose  his  life,  what  would  be  the  fate 
of  his  trusty  followers  ? 

2.  Aguirre  gave  him  his  thanks,  asking  if  he  had  any 
other  witness  to  these  doings.  Garcia  said,  yes,  that  a 
little  mestizo  page  of  the  maestro  had  been  present  at  the 
conspiracy.  The  boy  was  brought  into  Aguirre’s  presence, 
most  probably  taught  by  Garcia,  as  to  the  answers  he  was  to 
give,  and  said  that  he  had  been  present  at  the  whole  of  the 
proceedings. 

Besides  this,  Aguirre  was  informed  that,  on  the  same  day, 
when  Martin  Perez  was  in  the  plaza,  the  soldiers  had  spoken 
amongst  themselves,  saying,  if  anything  should  happen 
to  Lope  de  Aguirre  with  the  provincial’s  people,  who  was 
then  to  govern  them  ? That  this  difficulty  had  been  resolved 
by  Martin  Perez,  who  said  : “ Am  not  I here,  and  ready 
to  serve  you  all ; I will  do  my  duty  right  well,  should 
the  old  man  fail  us.”  These  two  statements,  whether 
false  or  true,  were  considered  by  Aguirre  to  be  sufficient 
reasons  for  killing  the  maestro  del  campo,  for  which  purpose 
he  chose  a little  bearded  monkey  called  Chaves,  who,  al- 
though still  young,  was  learned  in  every  species  of  villany, 
and  some  others  of  a similar  stamp,  belonging  to  his  guard, 
and  commanded  them  to  kill  Martin  Perez  (whom  he  sent 
for)  the  moment  he  came  into  the  fortress.  They  were  on 
the  watch,  and  as  soon  as  he  came  into  the  room  where 
Aguirre  was  (unaware  of  the  treason),  to  inquire  what  were 
his  orders,  the  little  Chaves  came  behind  him,  firing  his 
arquebuss,  and  wounding  him  badly.  The  rest  rushed  on 
the  victim  with  daggers  and  knives,  wounding  him  in  the 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


149 


head  and  body,  so  that  his  bowels  and  his  brains  were  seen. 
The  wretched  maestro  del  campo,  now  in  the  agonies  of 
death,  wandered  about  the  fortress  with  a portion  of  his 
brains  and  bowels  out  of  his  body,  imploring  confession  with 
loud  cries.  The  murderers  followed  him,  when  he  fell,  and 
Chaves  rushed  on  him  and  cut  his  throat.  These  horrors, 
committed  by  these  ministers  of  Satan,  disturbed  the  inmates 
of  the  fortress,  and  the  imprisoned  inhabitants  saw  little 
else  before  them  but  the  cruel  fate  of  the  maestro  del 
campo ; so  they  (both  men  and  women,  blinded  by  the  fear 
of  death)  hid  themselves  in  the  upper  rooms  and  other 
obscure  parts  of  the  fortress,  and  under  their  beds  ; and  there 
were  persons  who  broke  open  the  windows  of  the  turrets, 
so  much  strength  did  fear  give  them  ; and  one  Maria  de 
Trujillo,  the  wife  of  Francisco  de  Ribera,  the  alcalde,  threw 
herself  into  the  street  from  a high  window.  God,  in  his 
mercy,  was  pleased  to  save  her  from  death,  by  reason  of  the 
force  of  the  fall.  There  were  also  one  Domingo  Lopez  and 
one  Pedro  de  Angulo,  inhabitants  of  the  town,  who  threw 
themselves  from  a high  turret,  fled,  and  hid  themselves, 
thus  saving  their  lives. 

3.  The  rest  of  Aguirre’s  people  were  in  the  plaza,  under 
some  apprehension,  and  murmuring  in  consequence  of  what 
they  had  heard  had  taken  place  in  the  fortress.  The  traitor, 
hearing  this,  appeared  at  a window,  and  told  them  not  to  be 
uneasy,  for  that  the  noise  they  had  heard  in  the  fortress  was 
caused  by  his  having  commanded  Martin  Perez  to  be  killed, 
his  son  and  maestro  del  campo,  because  he  had  wished  to 
mutiny  and  kill  him,  and  then  go  away  with  the  people; 
so  those  who  were  in  the  plaza  were  quieted. 

Aguirre  had  been  told  that  Anton  Llamoso,  captain  of  the 
ammunition,  and  one  of  his  great  friends,  was  one  of  the 
conspirators  with  Martin  Perez ; and  Aguirre,  seeing  him 
pass  before  him,  and  near  to  the  body  and  the  murderers, 
who  had  their  arms  in  their  hands,  said  to  Llamoso,  44  They 


150 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


also  tell  me  that  you  were  one  of  the  party  with  the  maestro 
del  campo  ; how  was  this  ? Was  this  friendship  ? And  dost 
thou  hold  so  lightly  the  love  I feel  for  you  ?”  Those  who 
had  slain  Martin  Perez,  and  were  now  steeped  in  his  blood, 
desirous  of  other  deaths,  had  scarcely  heard  Aguirre’s  words 
to  Llamoso,  when  they  came  near  to  both,  awaiting  Aguirre’s 
signal  to  murder  Llamoso. 

The  great  fear  that  fell  upon  Llamoso,  however,  did  not  pre- 
vent him  from  making  explanations  to  Aguirre,  backing  them 
up  by  many  oaths,  mixed  with  a thousand  blasphemies  against 
those  who  had  falsely  accused  him,  and  saying  that  treason 
had  never  entered  his  thoughts,  and  that  Aguirre  ought  to 
believe  him,  for  the  affection  he  had  always  had  for  him 
and  his  doings  ; and,  when  it  seemed  to  him  that  Aguirre 
was  not  satisfied  with  his  words,  he  rushed  upon  the  body 
of  Martin  Perez,  which  was  almost  cut  to  pieces,  and,  before 
those  who  were  present,  he  threw  himself  upon  it,  shouting, 
“ Curse  this  traitor,  who  wished  to  commit  so  great  a crime! 
I will  drink  his  blood ! ” and,  putting  his  mouth  over  the 
wounds  in  the  head,  with  more  than  demoniac  rage,  he 
began  to  suck  the  blood  and  brains  that  issued  from  the 
wounds,  and  swallowed  what  he  sucked,  as  if  he  were  a 
famished  dog.  This  caused  such  horror  to  those  who  were 
present,  that  there  was  not  one  who  was  not  turned  sick  at 
heart  by  the  scene.  Aguirre  was  satisfied  of  his  fidelity,  and 
so  it  turned  out,  for  there  was  no  one  who  sustained  him, 
until  his  last  hour,  like  unto  this  Llamoso. 

4.  The  provincial’s  ship  could  not  arrive  at  the  port  of  the 
city  before  Monday  morning,  having  left  Punta  de  Piedras 
on  the  previous  day  (Sunday),  in  consequence  of  contrary 
winds.  This  day,  early  in  the  morning,  they  anchored  half 
a league  from  the  land,  out  of  range  of  Aguirre’s  artillery, 
but  the  provincial  was  near  enough  to  cause  the  traitor  some 
inquietude. 

Aguirre  prepared  for  defence,  hearing  that  the  provincial 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


151 


would  land  some  of  his  men.  He  collected  some  of  his  sol- 
diers, and  marched  towards  the  beach,  near  to  the  ship, 
taking  with  him  five  brass  falconets,  which  he  brought  with 
him  from  the  Maranon. 

All  were  charged,  ready  for  the  provincial’s  men,  when 
they  should  land.  The  boats  of  the  provincial’s  men,  having 
approached  those  of  Aguirre,  within  hearing  distance,  they 
upbraided  the  traitor’s  men,  telling  them  that  they  were 
cruel  traitors,  disloyal  and  mutinous  to  their  king,  indeed, 
anything  that  came  uppermost;  they  also  received  a reply 
from  those  of  Aguirre,  in  no  very  measured  terms,  coupled 
with  a thousand  blasphemies,  because  those  in  the  piraguas 
and  galleon  would  not  land,  or  leave  the  boats  where  the 
royal  standard  and  flags  were  hoisted. 


CHAP.  XXXYI. 

1.  Lope  de  Aguirre  writes  to  the  provincial. — 2„  The  provincial  replies 
from  his  ship , and  then  sets  sail.  Aguirre  hangs  two  soldiers. — 
3.  Opinions  as  to  whether  it  was  politic  of  the  provincial  to  com- 
municate with  the  traitor. — 4.  The  opinions  and  objections  re- 
solved. 

1.  Aguirre,  seeing  that  the  provincial’s  people  would  not 
land,  returned  the  same  day  to  the  fortress,  whence  he 
wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  friar  : — 

THE  LETTER  OF  AGUIRRE  TO  THE  PROVINCIAL. 

“ Magnificent  and  Reverend  Sir, — It  would  give  us  much 
greater  pleasure  to  celebrate  your  paternity’s  reception  with 
boughs  and  flowers,  than  with  arquebusses  and  discharges  of 
artillery,  because  it  has  been  told  to  us,  by  many  persons, 
that  such  would  be  more  generous;  and,  if  we  are  to  judge 
by  the  proceedings  we  have  this  day  observed,  which  are 


152 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


greater  than  we  had  been  led  to  expect ; it  would  seem  that 
your  paternity  is  a lover  of  arms  and  military  exploits  : and 
thus  we  see  that  you  imitate  the  honour,  virtue,  and  nobility, 
which  our  forefathers  attained  sword  in  hand.  This  I do  not 
deny;  neither  do  these  sehores  who  are  here,  and  who  came 
from  Piru  by  the  river  Maranon,  to  discover  and  settle  new 
countries,  some  of  us  maimed,  some  halt,  and  some  of  sound 
body.  Owing  to  the  troubles  in  Piru,  we  sought  to  find  a 
land,  miserable  as  it  might  be,  to  give  rest  to  our  poor  bodies, 
which  are  covered  with  more  seams  than  are  pilgrims’  weeds, 
and  we  would  have  remained  and  settled  there,  had  we  not, 
after  many  troubles,  passed  from  the  river,  and  into  the  sea, 
hungry  and  menaced  even  by  death ; and  let  those  who  may 
come  against  us,  take  into  account  that  they  come  to  war 
with  the  ghosts  of  dead  men.  The  soldiers  of  your  paternity 
call  us  traitors,  but  they  should  be  chastised,  they  should 
not  say  so,  because  to  attack  Don  Philip,  king  of  Castille,  is 
the  work  of  grand  and  noble  souls  ; for,  if  we  were  engaged 
in  mean  occupations,  we  could  pass  an  orderly  life,  but  we 
know  no  other  trade  than  to  make  cannon  balls  and  sharpen 
lances,  which  are  the  sort  of  money  current  here.  If  there 
was  any  necessity  to  go  into  details,  we  might  make  it  known 
to  your  paternity,  that  Piru  owes  much  to  us,  and  we  might 
relate  the  cogent  reasons  we  have  for  doing  what  we  do,  but 
of  these  things  I will  say  nothing. 

“ To-morrow,  please  God,  I will  send  to  your  paternity 
copies  of  the  edicts  that  have  been  made  amongst  us, 
each  man  being  at  liberty  to  do  as  he  thinks  best. 
There  are  those,  with  you,  who  swore  fealty  to  Don  Fer- 
nando de  Guzman  as  their  king,  and  denaturalized  them- 
selves from  the  kingdoms  of  Spain  ; and  they  mutinied, 
and  usurped  the  powers  of  justice,  and  pillaged  estates  ; 
amongst  these  were  Alonso  Arias,  Don  Fernando’s  ser- 
geant, and  Koderigo  Gutierrez,  his  chamberlain.  Of 
the  other  senores  we  need  take  no  account,  because  such 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


153 


discourse  would  be  trifling  ; although,  as  to  Arias,  he  would 
not  be  mentioned,  had  he  not  been  a good  rope  maker. 
Rodrigo  Gutierrez  was  rather  well  to  do,  but  he  had  a 
downward  look,  a sign  that  he  was  a great  traitor.  Then 
there  was  Gonzalo  de  Zuniga,  a man  of  Seville.  Know 
then,  your  paternity,  that  he  was  a great  buffoon,  and  his 
tricks  are  these : he  was  in  Popayan  with  Alvaro  de  Hoyon, 
in  the  rebellion  against  his  majesty,  and  when  his  captain 
was  about  to  fight,  he  deserted  him  and  fled ; and,  having 
escaped,  he  was  in  Piru  with  Sylva  in  the  mutiny  and 
robbery  of  the  royal  treasure,  when  they  killed  the  judge, 
and  then  he  ran  away  again.  He  is  such  a coward  that,  as 
long  as  there  is  anything  to  eat,  he  is  diligent,  and  in  the  hour 
of  battle  he  flees,  but  his  signatures  will  not  desert.  I am 
sorry  that  one  man  is  not  here,  namely  Salguero,  because 
we  want  him  much  to  watch  over  our  sheep,  because  he 
understands  that  business  well.  As  to  my  good  friends 
Martin  Bruno,  Anton  Perez,  and  Andres  Dias,  I kiss  their 
hands.  As  to  Monguia  and  Artiaga,  may  God  pardon  them, 
and  if  they  are  alive,  I beseech  your  paternity  to  let  me 
know  ;l  and  we  should  all  like  to  be  together,  and  that  your 
paternity  were  our  patriarch  : for,  after  believing  that  God 
is  no  more  than  any  other,  all  the  rest  is  moonshine. 

“ I beg  of  your  paternity  not  to  go  to  Santo  Domingo, 
because  we  believe  that  you  will  be  dispossessed  of  the 
office  you  hold  there. 

“ In  your  reply,  I beseech  your  paternity  that  you  will 
write  to  me,  and  let  us  treat  one  another  well  in  this  war. 
God  will  bring  trouble  on  all  traitors,  and  the  king  will 
restore  the  loyal  to  life,  although  up  to  this  time  we  have  seen 
no  one  resuscitated  by  a king  ; he  cures  no  wounds,  he  re- 
stores no  one  to  life.  May  the  most  magnificent  and 

1 All  these  men,  respecting  whom  Aguirre  writes  to  the  provincial, 
were  the  soldiers  who  were  sent  to  capture  his  ship,  and  deserted  to  him. 


X 


154 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


reverend  person  of  your  paternity,  be  in  great  and  increas- 
ing dignity. 

From  this  fortress  of  Margarita,  I kiss  the  hands  of  your 
paternity.  Your  servant, 

“ Lope  de  Aguirre.” 

2.  Aguirre  sent  this  letter,  by  some  Indians  in  a piragua, 
which  was  received  by  the  provincial,  and  seen  by  his  fol- 
lowers, who  roared  with  laughter,  for  it  appeared  to  them 
to  be  the  nonsense  of  a buffoon,  rather  than  the  reasons 
of  a captain-general.  The  provincial  replied  as  a learned 
and  religious  man  should,  advising  Aguirre  to  abandon  his 
road  of  errors  and  to  turn  into  the  path  of  loyalty  and  service 
to  his  king,  which  was  of  great  import  to  him  for  the  security 
of  his  conscience ; but  if,  through  his  blind  obstinacy  he 
would  not  do  so,  the  provincial  charged  him  as  a Christian, 
to  have  reverence  for  churches  and  all  holy  things,  and  the 
honour  of  women,  and,  for  the  love  of  that  God  to  whom  he 
would  have  to  give  account  of  his  doings,  that  he  would 
stop  the  shedding  of  blood,  and  the  continuance  of  cruelties 
in  that  island ; that  Monguia  and  Artiaga  were  alive,  and 
were  faithful  servants  to  his  majesty,  and,  that  in  what  they 
had  done  by  entering  his  service,  they  had  complied  with 
their  obligation  as  Spaniards.  This  answer  was  sent  by  the 
Indians  who  brought  Aguirre’s  letter.  The  provincial  then 
got  under  weigh,  and  returned  to  Maracapana,  sailing  from 
thence  to  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  made 
known  all  the  news  concerning  the  tyrant,  and  his  cruel- 
ties. 

Whilst  the  correspondence  was  going  on  with  the  pro- 
vincial, and  his  ship  was  at  anchor,  two  of  Aguirre’s  soldiers, 
one  named  Juan  de  San  Juan,  and  the  other  Paredes, 
were  observed  on  the  beach,  reposing  under  the  shade  of 
some  cactus  trees.  Amongst  those  who  saw  them,  there 
were  not  wanting  some  who  were  not  friendly  to  them,  who 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


155 


told  Aguirre  that  these  two  soldiers  were  hiding,  and  await- 
ing an  opportunity  to  desert  to  the  provincial’s  ship.  This 
w^as  sufficient  for  the  tyrant,  and  he  had  them  immediately 
hung  at  the  rollo ,*  without  even  allowing  them  to  confess. 

S.  There  were  some  who  considered  the  provincial’s  visit 
to  Aguirre  ill  timed,  for  the  traitor,  seeing  an  opposing  force  so 
near,  and  suspicious  of  a larger  one  being  sent  against  him, 
killed  the  governor  and  the  others ; and  also,  as  the  pro- 
vincial made  this  demonstration,  he  might  have  done  some- 
thing more,  by  landing  his  people,  for  with  them  and  some 
of  the  inhabitants,  who  had  fled  to  the  woods,  but  who  would 
have  joined  them,  he  might  have  made  a show  of  his  forces, 
and  might  have  got  away  those  of  Aguirre’s  party  who  had 
been  obliged  to  follow  him  against  their  will,  seeing  that 
they  would  find  protection  with  the  king’s  forces  ; so  that  at 
least  the  tyrant  would  not  have  left  the  island  with  so  large 
a force  as  he  brought  to  it. 

4.  To  these  views  there  were  two  replies  : one  was  that  those 
who  had  fled  to  the  woods,  had  received  no  notice  of  the  pro- 
vincial’s approach,  neither  was  it  known  that  the  tyrant  had 
any  men  with  him  against  their  will ; but  rather,  from  their 
acts,  it  was  to  be  believed  that  they  followed  him  cheerfully. 
The  next  reason  was  that,  had  the  provincial  landed  his 
party,  greater  misery  would  have  resulted,  for  the  cruelties 
of  Aguirre  and  his  fierce  butcheries,  were  such,  that  had  the 
inhabitants  and  the  provincial’s  men  not  been  able  to  join, 
more  would  have  been  imprisoned,  and  the  threats  he  had 
fulminated  against  the  defenceless  people  would  have  been 
put  into  execution  to  the  utmost  on  man,  woman  and  child. 
As  the  provincial  and  Aguirre  did  not  meet,  it  would  seem 
that  the  former  did  not  err  in  not  landing  ; moreover,  it  is 

1 The  rollo , or  pillar,  emblematic  of  jurisdiction,  was  used  as  a gallows, 
and  also  as  a garrote.  The  culprit,  being  placed  against  it,  the  strangling 
cord  was  passed  round  his  neck,  and  round  the  pillar,  and  then  tightened 
from  behind. 


156 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


requisite  to  take  into  consideration  the  provincial’s  holy 
zeal,  which  never  did  wrong  to  any  one,  and  if  crimes  fol- 
lowed, it  was  not  his  intention  that  such  should  happen. 


CHAP.  XXXVII. 

1.  Aguirre  prepares  to  leave  the  island , and  kills  a soldier. — 2.  He  has 
flags  made , and  blessed  in  the  church , on  the  feast  of  the  day  of  our 
Lady  of  Assumption. — 3.  Aguirre  makes  an  oration  to  his  captains , 
and  ensigns,  on  giving  them  the  flags. — 4.  A soldier  escapes  from 
Aguirre,  on  account  of  which  he  kills  two  others,  also  a woman. 

I.  Aguirre  began  to  be  desirous  of  leaving  the  island,  but 
he  found  his  steps  rather  retarded,  for  he  had  sunk  his  bri- 
gantines, and  the  provincial’s  ship  had  escaped  him,  and  he 
had  only  three  small  barks,  insufficient  for  his  soldiers,  arms, 
ammunition,  and  provisions,  so  he  commanded  the  ship  to 
be  finished,  which  the  governor  had  in  the  dockyard.  He 
was  informed  that  there  were  some  carpenters,  who  had 
hidden  themselves  amongst  the  inhabitants,  and  he  ordered 
them  to  bring  the  carpenters  to  him,  saying  that  they  should 
be  well  treated ; and,  as  the  people  were  suffering  so  much 
from  the  traitor,  and  wished  to  get  rid  of  so  wicked  a 
guest,  they  sought  out  some  carpenters  for  him,  so  that 
the  ship  might  be  finished,  and  thus  shorten  Aguirre’s 
stay. 

Doubtless  there  were  occasions  for  the  inhabitants  to 
escape  from  the  city,  and  to  fly  from  the  dangers  that  always 
menaced  their  lives.  This  was  known  to  Aguirre,  and,  as 
his  efforts  to  catch  them  were  insufficient,  he  took  vengeance 
on  their  houses  and  estates  by  robbing  and  destroying  them, 
rooting  up  their  crops,  cutting  down  their  trees  and  demo- 
lishing their  orchards ; and,  as  it  appeared  to  him  that  these 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


157 


punishments  did  not  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  will,  because 
they  were  not  mixed  with  human  blood,  he  decided  upon 
killing  one  Martin  Diaz  de  Armendariz,  cousin  of  the  gover- 
nor, Pedro  de  Ursua,  who  came  with  the  traitor  very  much 
against  his  will.1  He  was  considered  a sort  of  prisoner,  and 
Aguirre  thought  of  leaving  him  behind,  and  sent  him  out 
of  the  city,  to  remain  on  an  estate,  with  orders  not  to  leave 
it  until  the  traitor  should  have  left  the  island.  There  this 
soldier  lived,  doing  harm  to  no  one,  when  the  traitor  changed 
his  mind,  it  appearing  to  him  that  it  would  not  be  politic 
to  leave  enemies  in  the  rear,  so  he  sent  certain  of  his  soldiers 
to  where  Armendariz  was,  with  orders  to  strangle  him,  which 
was  done,  without  confession,  for  the  murderers  knew  that 
this  would  give  greater  pleasure  to  their  general,  Aguirre. 

2.  As  he  was  now  arranging  his  departure  from  the 
island,  amongst  other  things  he  caused  three  flags  to  be 
made  of  the  silk  he  had  stolen.  They  were  of  the  colour 
that  represented  his  cruelties,  namely  black  taffety,  spotted 
with  red  crossed  swords,  which  represented  the  blood  he 
shed,  and  the  cause  of  lamentation  and  mourning.  He 
ordered  these  flags,  when  finished,  to  be  blessed  in  the 
church,  as  if  such  a ceremony  could  do  him  service. 

The  traitor  ordered  that,  on  the  Day  of  Assumption  of  our 
Lady,  the  15th  of  August  of  the  year  1561,  a solemn  mass 
should  be  said  in  the  mother  church,  to  which  he  went, 
with  his  followers  in  warlike  array,  he  himself  going  in  the 
vanguard  as  the  general.  On  the  way  to  the  church  he  saw 
the  king  of  spades,  out  of  an  old  pack  of  cards,  in  the  street, 
on  the  ground ; he  stooped  down  and  picked  it  up,  but  he 
soon  threw  it  from  him,  as  it  appeared  to  him  that  by  doing 
so  he  showed  his  disdain  for  the  king  of  Castille ; and,  mad- 
man as  he  was,  he  began  to  stamp  on  the  ground,  swearing 
a thousand  oaths  against  his  majesty,  and,  snatching  the  card 

1 Probably  a son  of  Ursua’s  uncle,  Miguel  Diaz  de  Armendariz,  the 
juez  de  residencia  in  New  Granada.  (See  page  1,  and  the  Introduction.) 


158 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


from  the  ground  with  great  passion  and  rage,  tore  it  to  pieces. 
This  madness  of  his  was  imitated  by  his  more  particular 
friends  among  the  soldiery,  who  joined  him  in  shouting  a 
thousand  blasphemies  against  God  and  his  saints. 

Having  arrived  at  the  church,  and  the  flags  having  been 
blessed  (by  the  priest  who  said  the  mass),  the  traitor  handed 
them  to  the  captains  and  ensigns,  saying  that  he  confided 
them  to  their  valour  and  loyalty ; that,  as  he  was  satisfied  of 
their  persons,  he  gave  them  the  flags,  so  that  they  might 
march  under  the  flags,  to  follow,  defend,  and  guard  his 
person,  going  out  into  the  field  on  all  occasions  with  the 
flags,  against  any  sort  of  warriors  who  might  oppose  them ; 
that  they  might  make  war  upon  all  who  opposed  them;  that 
the  obstinate  towns  were  to  be  sacked,  but  he  charged  them 
to  respect  the  churches  and  female  honour,  but  nothing  else. 
They  had  full  liberty  to  do  as  they  pleased,  for  as  they  had 
made  a new  king,  they  could  make  new  laws.  This  gave 
the  soldiers  great  pleasure.  When  they  left  the  church, 
accompanying  their  general  back  to  the  fortress,  they  were 
all  most  joyous  that  he  had  given  them  such  broad  licence 
to  commit  crimes  ; and,  as  to  the  exceptions  mentioned  by 
the  traitor,  respecting  their  veneration  for  churches  and  the 
honour  of  women,  they  well  knew  that  in  breaking  them, 
they  would  receive  the  same  punishment  as  for  any  other 
crimes,  which  were  greater  praises  and  rewards  to  those  who 
committed  the  more  heinous,  so  that  the  soldiery  might  be 
more  satisfied.  These  exceptions  were  merely  to  flatter  and 
deceive  the  inhabitants,  who  were  present.  The  rovers  were 
not  moved  by  any  zeal  for  the  service  of  God ; to  whom 
we  should  give  infinite  thanks,  that  He  put  a bridle  on 
them,  so  that  they  did  not  sow  the  seeds  of  any  heresy,  for 
the  abominable  way  of  their  lives  might  have  produced 
heresy. 

4.  Not  the  least  culpable,  in  every  species  of  horror,  was 
Alonso  de  Villena,  for  which  reason  his  life  had  been  spared 


THE  TRATTOR  AGUIRRE. 


159 


up  to  this  time.  Aguirre  was  now  set  against  him,  for 
certain  words  of  little  importance  it  was  said  he  had  made 
use  of  against  his  chief,  for  which  he  received  a severe  re- 
primand, and  he  was  not  in  favour  as  heretofore.  This 
caused  Villena  to  be  fearful  (for  he  knew  Aguirre  too  well, 
and  that  it  did  not  require  him  to  be  very  angry  with  any 
man,  to  kill  him,  although  he  might  be  his  best  friend),  and 
he  began  to  search  for  means  of  flight,  to  return  to  his 
devotion  to  his  king,  without  pain  of  death,  for  he  con- 
sidered himself  as  condemned,  for  having  been  concerned  in 
the  murder  of  the  governor  Ursua,  and  in  nearly  all  the 
others  that  had  been  perpetrated.  To  these  were  added 
fresh  fears,  should  he  fall  into  Aguirre’s  hands,  after  he  had 
deserted.  This  soldier  wished  it  to  be  understood  by  the 
inhabitants,  that  he  fled  from  Aguirre,  fearing  he  would  kill 
him. 

It  was  bruited  among  some  of  the  soldiers  that  Villena 
wanted  to  kill  Aguirre,  and  this  coming  to  the  traitor’s  ears, 
he  sent  to  some  of  his  friends  to  lay  hands  on  Villena,  and 
kill  him.  But  Villena  was  advised  in  time  by  his  spies, 
that  Aguirre’s  soldiers  were  after  him,  so  he  escaped  by  a 
false  door,  and  hid  himself  in  the  woods ; and,  although  the 
strictest  search  was  made,  he  was  not  found.  It  was 
made  public  that  Villena  was  sought,  that  he  might  be 
executed,  because  he  wanted  to  kill  Aguirre ; so  he  gained 
favour  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  island.  But  this  caused 
the  death  of  some  of  his  friends,  as  of  one  Dominguez, 
alferez  of  Aguirre’s  guard,  and  one  Loaysa,  (a  great  friend 
of  Villena’s).  Aguirre  declared  it  to  be  impossible  that  they 
were  not  in  concert  with  Villena ; so,  without  any  further 
evidence,  the  traitor  determined  to  kill  them,  and  employed 
one  Juan  de  Aguirre  to  do  it,  who  stealthily  came  upon 
Dominguez,  and  killed  him  with  numberless  stabs  of  his 
dagger.  Loaysa  was  strangled,  without  being  allowed  to 
confess.  Aguirre  then  arrested  the  lady  of  the  house  where 


160 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


these  two  men  lodged,  one  Anna  de  Rojas,  a married  and 
excellent  woman,  accusing  her  of  being  privy  to  Vil- 
lena’s  treason,  and  of  not  having  informed  him.  She  was 
hung  on  the  rollo  in  the  centre  of  the  plaza.  That  this 
execution  might  be  the  more  solemn  and  celebrated  amongst 
these  traitors,  a squadron  of  arquebusiers  entered  the 
plaza  when  she  was  about  to  be  executed,  and  whilst 
hanging  and  half  dead,  they  fired  one  after  the  other  at  her, 
in  presence  of  their  infamous  commander,  who  applauded 
the  best  aims  they  made  at  the  heart  and  head  of  the  poor 
creature,  and  at  whose  wretched  death  they  remained  most 
joyous. 


CHAP.  XXXVIII. 

] . Aguirre  orders  cm  old  man  to  be  hilled  ; he  likewise  does  the  same  to  a 
friar  of  Santo  Domingo.  Tie  also  commands  another  friar  to  be 
hilled , to  whom  he  had  confessed. — 2.  Of  another  who  was  strangled , 
which  caused  much  sorrow  in  the  town. — 3.  The  traitor  hangs  an 
old  man  and  a woman;  he  also  does  ridiculous  things  to  some  soldiers. 
— 4.  One  Francisco  Fajardo  comes  to  the  island  of  Margarita  from 
Caraccas , with  some  people,  with  the  intention  of  routing  Aguirre. 

1.  This  good  woman’s  husband  was  named  Diego  Gomez. 
H e was  old  and  crippled,  and  at  that  time  was  very  ill  at  a 
farm,  with  a friar  of  the  order  of  Santo  Domingo.  It  seemed 
to  Aguirre  that  the  old  man  had  participated  with  his  wife 
in  the  treason  of  Villena,  so  he  sent  his  head-constable, 
Paniagua,  to  strangle  him,  which  he  did,  taking  with  him, 
as  an  assistant,  a Portuguese  soldier,  named  Manuel  Baeza, 
with  two  others.  When  they  had  killed  the  old  man,  the  friar, 
it  would  appear,  blamed  them,  or  else,  to  give  pleasure  to  their 
general  (who  hated  priests),  they  strangled  the  friar  on  their 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


161 


own  account.  They  buried  both  in  one  grave,  returning  to 
Aguirre  with  an  account  of  what  they  had  done,  which 
gave  him  great  satisfaction.  Aguirre  also  had  great  plea- 
sure in  killing  another  religious  man  of  the  same  order,  of 
an  exemplary  life,  and  much  beloved  in  the  island.  He 
had  confessed  to  this  friar,  more  out  of  form  than  for  the 
health  of  his  soul,  and,  in  discharging  his  conscience,  the 
friar  severely  reprehended  him,  and,  with  holy  exhortation, 
urged  him,  as  he  was  bound  to  do,  to  step  aside  from 
the  evil  road  he  was  going,  and  to  follow  that  of  God  and 
his  king,  and  not  to  have  the  weight  of  so  many  murders 
on  his  conscience.  This  exhortation  was  a bitter  draught, 
and  the  good  inspirations  that  God  offers  to  those  who 
have  turned  their  backs  upon  him,  are  not  heeded  by 
them,  but  rather  held  in  hatred,  and  they  will  not  see,  or 
take  counsel  (as  those  that  are  blind)  of  those  who  put  these 
lights  before  them.  Not  only  did  this  traitor  not  take  heed  of 
what  this  blessed  friar  said,  but  he  conceived  a mortal  hatred 
for  him,  so  that  he  would  not  see  him  again,  or  even  hear 
his  name  mentioned ; and  he  was  often  on  the  point 
of  killing  him,  but  did  not  then  carry  his  intention  into 
effect,  in  consequence  of  the  friar  being  held  in  great  esteem  ; 
until  the  head  constable,  Paniagua,  had  killed  the  other 
friar  at  the  estate.  Then  Aguirre  charged  him  with  the 
execution  of  his  confessor,  for  it  seemed  to  him  that  Paniagua 
would  bring  eager  hands  to  this  new  work  of  death,  as 
one  who  had  already  dispatched  a son  of  the  church  on 
his  own  authority,  and  that  he  had  better  be  the  instrument 
of  death  for  the  confessor ; and  so  Aguirre  gave  him  the 
order  to  go  and  kill  his  confessor,  which  he  did  without 
loss  of  time. 

2.  He  met  with  the  confessor  in  the  road,  although  some 
say  he  found  him  in  the  church,  and  dragging  him  out,  he 
thrust  him  into  a house,  where  he  told  him  he  had  been 
sent  by  his  general  to  kill  him  ; to  which  the  confessor  re- 

Y 


162 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


plied,  that  if  such  was  the  case,  he  hoped  he  might  be 
allowed  to  pray  to  God.  Permission  having  been  given,  he 
threw  himself  with  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  said  the 
Psalm  of  the  Miserere,  and  other  holy  prayers,  when  those 
ministers  of  wickedness  took  him  up  from  the  ground  to  kill 
him.  He  then  said  that  he  offered  himself  up  to  God,  in 
a pure  and  simple  spirit,  for  his  sins,  and  he  prayed  they 
would  give  him  the  most  cruel  death  they  possibly  could : 
he  then  clasped  his  hands  towards  heaven.  The  executioners 
put  the  cord  into  his  mouth,  and  from  the  back  began  to 
tighten  the  rope  and  strangle  him  with  such  violence,  that 
his  mouth  was  broken  to  pieces ; but,  seeing  that  he  did  not 
die  outright  under  this  species  of  cruelty,  they  lowered  the 
strangling  cord  to  his  throat,  and  again  twisting  it,  he  died. 
Such  was  the  end  of  his  exemplary  life. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  city,  nay,  of  the  whole  island,  were 
sorrowful  indeed  at  the  death  of  the  holy  man,  and  he  was 
looked  upon  as  a martyr,  having  been  sacrificed  for  having 
done  his  holy  duty  in  regard  to  the  sacrament  of  confession. 

3.  They  were  now  rapidly  finishing  the  ship  and  arrang- 
ing for  the  embarkation  of  Aguirre,  his  cruelties  also  were 
increasing,  and  it  appeared  a philosophical  maxim,  that  the 
natural  movement  is  stronger  in  the  end  than  at  the  begin- 
ning ; as  cruelty  was,  as  it  were,  naturalized  in  this  traitor. 

One  of  the  soldiers,  named  Simon  de  Sumorostro,  now  an 
old  man,  repenting  of  what  he  had  done,  and  not  wish- 
ing to  continue  with  Aguirre,  on  account  of  his  cruelties, 
begged  to  be  left  behind,  saying  that  he  was  now  too  old 
and  sickly  to  follow  the  wars.  Aguirre  replied  that  he 
might  remain,  and  the  old  man  left  his  presence  with  joy. 
Aguirre  then  called  some  of  his  ministers,  and  said  to  them, 
“ Old  Sumorostro  has  asked  permission  to  remain  behind, 
and  I have  granted  his  request,  go  and  see  that  he  is  safe  ; 
that,  during  my  absence,  the  inhabitants  and  authorities 
may  do  him  no  ill.” 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


163 


But  the  soldiers  knew  well  the  meaning  of  the  traitor, 
and  they  went  after  the  old  man,  and  took  him  straight  to 
the  rollo,  and  there  hanged  him.  This  prevented  others 
from  asking  the  same  favour  of  Aguirre,  but  some  of  them 
arranged  for  their  flight. 

Aguirre  also  hanged  a certain  Maria  Chaves  on  the  rollo , 
because  a soldier  who  lodged  in  her  house  had  fled,  and  she 
had  not  given  information  as  to  the  projected  desertion. 
The  amusements  of  this  tyrant  consisted  in  oppressing 
his  fellow  creatures  ; as  happened  to  a young  man,  who  un- 
intentionally had  not  paid  him  a visit.  He  was  ordered 
to  appear  at  the  fortress,  and,  after  Aguirre  had  severely 
reprimanded  him  for  his  want  of  attention,  he  ordered  the 
little  beard  he  had  to  be  rasped  off*,  washing  his  face  before 
and  after  the  operation  with  fetid  urine,  while  the  traitor 
(with  some  of  his  friends)  laughed  immoderately  at  the  scene. 
When  it  was  over,  the  young  man  was  ordered  to  present 
four  fowls  to  the  fellow  who  acted  as  the  barber.  The  same 
was  done  to  one  of  his  solders,  named  Alonso  Cayado,  be- 
cause he  was  a good  man,  and  an  enemy  to  the  cruelties 
practised  by  his  comrades ; so  it  appeared  to  the  traitor  that 
he  was  a useless  person,  but  not  having  then  decided  as  to 
his  death,  he  had  him  brought  into  his  presence,  he  being 
in  the  plaza,  and,  before  the  assembled  crowd,  had  him 
shaved  as  the  young  man  had  been,  saying  that  he  thus 
punished  him  for  not  having  on  a certain  occasion  fallen  in, 
in  the  ranks,  in  time.  These  barbarities  were  common, 
when  he  was  in  a happy  mood,  and  did  not  wish  to  kill 
his  soldiers ; but  there  were  occasions  when,  for  the  most 
trivial  occurrence,  his  victim  was  doomed  to  death. 

4.  They  were  now  nearly  ready  to  embark,  and  were  only 
waiting  for  the  people  to  go  on  board  the  ship,  and  set  sail, 
when  there  appeared  oft’  the  island  one  Francisco  Taxardo, 
inhabitant  of  the  town  of  our  Lady  of  Caraballeda  or  Carac- 
cas,  which  country  was  in  course  of  conquest  by  him.  He 


164 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


had  started  to  oppose  the  traitor,  on  receiving  the  news  from 
the  provincial.  He  came  to  the  island  with  other  inhabitants, 
in  piraguas,  accompanied  by  a good  number  of  Indians  with 
their  bows  and  arrows,  with  the  intention  of  seeing  what 
could  be  done  against  Aguirre.  He  might  have  succeeded 
had  he  come  sooner,  and  had  not  Aguirre  been  on  the  point 
of  starting  ; for  had  the  inhabitants  been  assisted  before,  the 
traitor  might  have  been  overthrown,  but  they  could  not  do 
this  alone,  for  they  were  so  few  in  number  ; neither  did 
Francisco  Taxardo  do  anything,  for  the  same  reason  ; for, 
although  he  landed  with  his  men,  and  came  near  to  the  town, 
it  was  under  cover  of  a wood,  from  whence  he  shouted  to 
Aguirre,  and  called  upon  the  traitor’s  soldiers  to  come  over 
to  him,  and  he  also  called  to  the  inhabitants,  offering  protec- 
tion to  all  those  who  joined  him,  as  he  was  under  the  king’s 
banners. 

Aguirre  was  suspicious  that  Taxardo  had  more  men  with 
him  than  he  chose  to  shew,  and,  for  fear  of  his  soldiers 
going  over  to  the  king,  he  would  not  march  out,  but 
carefully  guarded  his  men  in  the  fortress,  closing  the  gates, 
and  allowing  no  one  to  go  out.  Taxardo  did  not  dare  to 
leave  the  cover  of  the  little  wood,  which  Aguirre  would  have 
cut  down,  but  for  the  fear  that  those  he  sent  would  desert 
from  him. 

Aguirre  told  his  men,  that  Taxardo’s  reason  for  inviting 
them  in  so  friendly  a way  was  merely  to  have  them  in  his 
power,  and  that  when  he  had  them,  he  would  take  ven- 
geance on  them  for  the  deaths  they  had  caused  in  that  island, 
and  elsewhere. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


165 


CHAP.  XXXIX. 

1.  Aguirre  embarks  with  all  his  people,  and,  whilst  doing  so,  he  causes  his 
admiral  to  be  killed. — 2.  The  traitor  sails,  but  changes  his  route,  by 
going  to  the  port  of  Burburata. — 3.  He  is  becalmed,  which  retards 
his  voyage. — 4.  They  burn  a ship  they  find  in  the  'port,  and  the 
inhabitants  advise  the  governor  of  Venezuela  of  Aguirre's  arrival. 

1.  The  traitor’s  fears  were  excited  at  the  arrival  of 
Taxardo,  and  it  caused  him  to  change  his  views  as  to  em- 
barking his  people,  so  that  Taxardo’s  party  could  do  no  harm 
with  their  arrows.  Aguirre  got  his  men  out  of  the  for- 
tress (it  being  inconvenient  for  them  to  sally  from  the  gate) 
through  an  opening  he  made  high  up  in  the  wall,  and  they 
went  down  by  a ladder  one  by  one,  and  embarked,  whilst  he, 
and  some  of  his  friends,  kept  guard ; until  there  only  remained 
a few  men,  including  his  admiral  Alonso  Rodriguez,  one 
of  his  old  friends,  who  was  not  a little  culpable  in  past 
crimes.  He,  seeing  that  the  waves  wetted  Aguirre,  begged 
of  him  to  retire,  so  that  he  might  not  get  wet.  This  obser- 
vation so  raised  his  anger  that,  drawing  his  sword,  he  cut 
the  admiral’s  arm  off.  He  then  ordered  him  to  be  attended 
to,  but,  immediately  changing  his  mind,  the  traitor  ordered 
him  to  be  killed,  which  was  done,  his  attention  and  polite- 
ness to  his  chief  having  cost  him  his  life  ; although  some 
said  that  the  admiral,  who  was  occupied  about  the  vessel, 
complained  that  the  people  would  be  uncomfortable  if  three 
horses  and  a mule,  sent  by  Aguirre,  went,  and  that  it  was 
this  that  incited  him  to  this  sanguinary  act. 

When  all  the  people  were  embarked,  and  Aguirre  was 
about  to  do  the  same  with  his  guard,  he  went  with  them  to 
the  house  of  the  priest  of  the  town,  named  Contreras,  and 
taking  him  much  against  his  will,  made  him  embark  also. 
All  being  on  board  the  three  vessels,  after  having  been 


166 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


on  the  island  forty  days,  and  having  robbed  and  destroyed 
many  estates,  they  left  the  inhabitants  in  the  greatest  misery, 
and  it  required  many  years  for  them  to  recover  from  such  a 
visitation. 

2.  Aguirre  stole  more  than  fifty  cross  bows,  many  swords, 
lances,  and  other  arms  which  were  in  the  fort ; three  good 
horses  and  one  mule,  and  all  the  horse  trappings  they  could 
lay  their  hands  on,  with  the  idea  of  finding  some  horses 
wherever  they  might  land.  The  soldiery  who  embarked 
numbered  one  hundred  and  fifty  men,  for,  although  when 
they  came  to  the  island  they  numbered  about  two  hundred, 
some  fifty  had  deserted,  including  those  who  joined  the  pro- 
vincial, in  Maracapana,  with  Monguia,  and  those  who  were 
killed.  Aguirre  left  the  island  on  the  last  Sunday  in  the 
month  of  August  of  1561. 

Aguirre  was  aware,  or  conjectured,  that  the  provincial  had 
given  information  concerning  him  to  the  whole  coast,  even 
as  far  as  Nombre  de  Dios  and  Panama,  so  that  at  the  various 
points  there  would  be  armed  forces  to  oppose  him,  and  to  go 
from  Nombre  de  Dios  to  Panama  would  be  very  difficult, 
for  he  might  be  easily  routed.  He  soon  decided  to  stand 
out  to  sea  from  the  island  of  Margarita,  and  then  changed 
his  course  for  the  port  of  Burburata,  with  the  intention  of 
traversing  the  government  of  Venezuela,  to  the  new  king- 
dom of  Granada,  from  thence  to  Popayan  and  Piru,  without 
considering  the  great  difficulties  that  might  intervene  during 
so  long  a journey,  and  so  he  ordered  the  pilots  to  steer  for 
the  port  of  Burburata. 

3.  He  did  not  think  himself  quite  certain  of  the  people  in 
two  of  the  vessels.  He  sailed  in  the  new  ship,  but  he  did 
not  allow  the  others  to  have  a cross-staff*,  to  observe  the  lati- 
tude, or  a compass,  so  they  had  his  vessel  in  sight  to  follow 
during  the  day,  and  at  night  he  hoisted  a light.  His  voyage 
was  not  so  prosperous  as  he  had  expected,  (and  as  is  gene- 
rally the  case  thereabouts,  in  consequence  of  the  wind  being 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


167 


aft,  so  that  it  is  only  a two  days*  voyage  from  the  island  of 
Margarita  to  the  port  of  Burbarata),  and  owing  to  a succession 
of  calms,  he  was  eight  days  at  sea.  He  attributed  this  delay 
to  the  bad  management  of  the  pilots,  and  he  menaced  them 
with  death,  believing  that,  as  he  was  so  long  in  seeing  his 
port,  the  pilots  were  taking  him  elsewhere.  This  caused 
this  most  impatient  being  to  give  utterance  to  a thousand 
blasphemies  and  heresies  against  God  and  his  saints ; saying 
at  times  that  if  God  had  made  the  heavens  for  the  wicked 
and  cruel  people  such  as  he  had  with  him,  he  would  not  go 
there ; at  other  times,  raising  his  eyes  to  heaven  with  an 
infernal  look,  he  said,  “ Oh,  God ! if  thou  wilt  do  me  a 
favour,  do  it  now,  and  the  glory  of  it  guard  for  thy  saints  !” 
Observing  that  the  calm  continued,  he  would  declare  that 
he  did  not  believe  in  God,  that  he  was  a great  robber, 
that  until  now-  he  had  been  on  his  side,  but  that  now  he 
had  deserted  him  and  gone  over  to  his  enemies  ; and  thus 
he  said  a thousand  other  nonsensical  things  against  the  sea, 
winds,  and  tempests,  in  which  he  was  joined  by  his  soldiers, 
who  echoed  his  words.  When  he  blasphemed  they  did  the 
same,  when  he  abjured  they  did  so,  when  he  was  murderous 
they  followed  his  example,  and  when  he  was  a robber  they 
joined  him ; and  as  he  was  a traitor  they  all  were  ; such  is 
the  power  of  the  heart  over  the  other  portions  of  the  body, 
such  also  is  the  divine  goodness  and  forbearance  until  the 
fitting  time  has  come.  However,  in  spite  of  all  these  blas- 
phemies, these  traitors  were  at  last  permitted  to  arrive  at  the 
port  of  Burburata,  on  the  seventh  of  September  ; when  they 
anchored  in  great  joy  and,  without  remaining  in  the  ships, 
they  immediately  landed.1 

1 “Agiri  spoilt  all  the  coast  of  Caraccas  and  the  province  of  Vene- 
zuela, and,  as  I remember,  it  was  the  same  year  that  Sir  John  Hawkins 
sailed  to  Saint  Juan  de  Lua  in  the  Jesus  of  LubecJc , for  himself  told  me 
that  he  met  with  such  a one  upon  the  coast  that  rebelled,  and  had  sailed 
downe  the  river  of  Amazons.” — Raleigh’s  Guiana , p.  23. 

Aguirre,  however,  could  not  have  been  the  pirate  met  by  old  Sir 


168 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


4.  The  first  act  of  the  traitor  was  to  set  a merchant 
vessel  on  fire,  the  owners  of  which,  knowing  of  Aguirre’s 
approach,  had  discharged  her  cargo  and  scuttled  her, 
but  there  being  no  great  depth  of  water,  a portion  re- 
mained exposed.  The  part  out  of  the  water  was  set  on 
fire,  which  gave  a light  to  the  traitors  all  that  night,  during 
which  they  remained  encamped  on  shore,  and  Aguirre 
would  not  allow  any  of  his  Maranones  to  move  until  the 
morning.1  The  inhabitants  of  the  town,  who  were  a short 
half  league  from  the  coast,  had,  on  the  first  news  about  the 
traitor,  taken  their  precautions  as  to  the  safety  of  their  pro- 
perty, as  did  also  other  towns  in  the  various  repartimientos 
(large  grants  of  land).  When  they  saw  Aguirre  entering 
their  port,  they  took  all  their  goods  away,  and,  as  they 
could  not  defend  the  place,  they  abandoned  it.  As  soon  as 
the  traitor  had  landed,  with  his  followers,  the  people  sent  to 
inform  the  governor,  Pablo  Collado,  who  was  waiting  for 
Aguirre  in  the  city  of  Tocuyo. 

The  governor,  perceiving  that  he  would  be  obliged  to 
show  a front  to  Aguirre,  and  seeing  that  those  he  had  with 
him  were  few  in  number,  ordered  that  the  neighbour- 
ing forces  should  join  him  in  Tocuyo,  and,  fearing  that 
he  would  not  be  strong  enough  for  the  enemy,  if  he 
was  the  attacking  party,  he  determined  to  harass  them, 

John  Hawkins,  as  he  was  killed  in  1561,  and  Hawkins  did  not  sail  from 
England,  in  the  Jesus  of  Lubech , until  1564,  and  did  not  reach  the 
West  Indies  until  the  following  year  ; when  he  disposed  of  a cargo  of 
slaves  at  this  very  port  of  Burburata.  He  probably  heard  of  the  doings 
of  Aguirre  at  this  place. 

Burburata,  in  Humboldt’s  time,  was  nothing  but  a port  of  embarka- 
tion for  mules.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  it  was  an  im- 
portant place. 

1 At  this  point  of  Aguirre’s  career,  Piedrahita  takes  up  the  narrative, 
the  details  of  which  he  collected  from  Pedro  Simon,  Pizarro’s  Varones 
Illustres  ( Vida  de  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes ),  and  Castellanos’  Elegias  de 
Varones  Illustres. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


169 


by  taking  all  provisions  out  of  their  reach,  and  keeping 
them  on  the  alert  for  ambushes  at  night,  for  none  of  them 
knew  the  country,  nor  the  passes,  which  were  very  rough 
in  places.  A royalist  force  had  been  assembled,  and 
Gutierrez  de  la  Pena,  an  inhabitant  of  the  city  of  Tucuyo, 
had  been  appointed  general.  Fresh  information  was  sent  to 
Pedro  Bravo  de  la  Molina  in  the  city  of  Merida,  inform- 
ing him  that  the  enemy  was  already  on  the  threshold, 
begging  of  him  to  come  with  all  the  men  and  arms  he  could 
muster,  and  supplicating  afresh  captain  Diego  Garcia  de 
Paredes,  and  the  rest  of  the  settlers  in  the  government  of 
Venezuela  (who,  as  we  have  said,  had  retreated  to  the 
city  of  Merida),  to  send  succour,  and  to  come  and  serve  the 
king  on  so  pressing  an  occasion  ; promising  them  oblivion 
for  past  occurrences. 


CHAP.  XL. 

1.  Garcia  de  Paredes  goes  from  Merida  to  Tocuyo , with  some  followers, 
sent  by  the  governor. — 2.  The  governor  of  Venezuela  sends  to  the 
governor  and  inhabitants  of  Merida  to  come  and  assist  him. — 3.  The 
governor  of  Merida  goes  with  twenty-five  soldiers  to  Tocuyo. — 4. 
Aguirre's  men  find  a pilot  in  the  town  of  Burburata , who  was  one  of 
those  who  had  passed  over  to  the  provincial. 

1.  Although,  on  the  first  news  received  from  the  gover- 
nor, Pablo  Collado,  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes  and  his  com- 
panions had  not  come  from  Merida,  they  were  yet  on  the 
alert,  like  good  and  faithful  vassals,  to  go  and  serve  his 
majesty,  and  on  receipt  of  the  second  notice,  they,  being 

z 


170 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


ready,  marched  forth  to  Tocuyo,  where  they  were  received 
with  open  arms,  particularly  by  the  governor,  who  thanked 
them  heartily  for  their  assistance.  The  governor  named 
Garcia  de  Paredes  as  his  maestro  del  campo,  offering  him 
explanations  of  what  had  occurred,  and  giving  him  to 
understand  how  much  he  appreciated  him.  He  added  that, 
in  consequence  of  Paredes  having  been  absent  when  they 
had  to  prepare  against  Aguirre,  he  found  himself,  as  it  were, 
caught  between  the  arch  and  the  wall,  and  was  in  such  a 
strait,  that  he  had  named  Gutierrez  de  la  Pena  general. 
He,  therefore,  begged  of  Paredes  that  he  would  accept  the 
office  of  maestro  del  campo  ; assuring  him  that  although 
Pena  had  the  title  of  general,  he  (Paredes)  would  have  the 
command  in  the  field,  and  the  charge  of  all.  Paredes  ac- 
cepted the  office,  thanking  the  governor,  and  offering  at  the 
same  time  to  lay  his  life  down  for  the  king. 

The  governor  and  the  maestro  del  campo  went  together 
to  the  city  of  Barquicimeto,  where  they  found  Gutierrez  de 
la  Pena,  drilling  the  people  he  had  got  together  ; for 
although  it  had  at  first  been  determined  to  muster  the  forces 
in  Tocayo,  it  was  afterwards  found  more  convenient  to  do 
so  in  Barquicimeto,  because  it  was  a more  open  country, 
and  nearer  to  the  port  where  the  traitor  had  landed. 

Pedro  Bravo  remained  in  Merida,  to  follow  Garcia  de 
Paredes,  with  all  the  people  he  could  possibly  collect.  He 
soon  gathered  together  the  principal  people  of  the  town, 
when  it  was  determined  to  send  a second  message  to  the  city 
of  Santa  Fe,  and,  although  they  had  been  ordered  not  to 
abandon  their  city  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  the  governor, 
even  if  they  knew  of  the  entry  of  the  traitor  into  the  pro- 
vince of  Venezuela ; yet  it  was  considered  of  more  import- 
ance to  the  king,  to  arrest  the  steps  of  Aguirre,  which  would 
also  ensure  the  safety  of  their  city. 

These  two  points  being  resolved  on  by  Pedro  Bravo  and 
the  inhabitants,  they  determined  to  dispatch  three  soldiers. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


171 


with  particulars  of  their  views,  to  the  city  of  Pamplona,  and 
from  thence  to  Santa  Fe.  Of  these,  one  was  named  Andres 
de  Pernia,  but  he,  although  a brave  man,  and  one  of  the  best 
soldiers  in  the  conquest  of  these  lands,  knowing  the  dif- 
ficulty of  traversing  the  country  of  so  many  warlike  Indians 
as  there  were  between  their  city  and  the  town  of  San 
Cristoval,  told  the  governor,  that  he  dared  not  go  with  so 
few  men,  for  that  they  would  surely  be  killed  on  the  way. 
But  as  Pedro  Bravo  and  the  inhabitants  considered  that 
they  could  not  spare  more  than  three,  it  was  agreed  that  it 
would  be  more  reasonable  to  go  and  assist  Venezuela  with 
all  their  men.  So  advices  were  not  forwarded  to  the  Beal 
Audiencia,  until  more  accurate  news  could  be  sent  of  the 
intentions  of  the  traitor,  and  of  the  route  he  intended  to 
take.  All  this  turned  out  well,  and  they  saved  themselves 
from  great  expense. 

S.  Following  out  the  second  plan  they  had  determined  on. 
Captain  Pedro  Bravo  was  ordered  to  get  twenty-five  of  his 
best  men  ready  without  loss  of  time,  and  to  go  with  them,  to 
the  help  of  the  licenciate  Pablo  Collado.  As  to  talk  about 
the  power  of  the  law  is  not  quite  the  same  as  to  fight  for  it, 
there  were  some  who  were  backward  in  coming  out  to  show 
a front  to  the  traitor,  their  view  of  the  case  being  that  their 
forces,  and  those  of  Venezuela,  were  insufficient  to  resist  so 
considerable  a body  of  the  enemy  as  they  were  led  to  be- 
lieve existed ; that  their  own  city  would  be  victimized,  and 
that  those  who  would  be  left  to  take  care  of  the  city,  would 
not  be  able  to  put  down  any  rising  of  the  Indians.  But  the 
high  spirit  of  Captain  Pedro  Bravo,  and  his  zeal  in  the 
service  of  his  majesty,  induced  him  to  desire  to  act  so  that 
the  traitor’s  steps  might  at  once  he  arrested,  for  it  would  be 
much  more  difficult  to  do  so,  when  he  had  penetrated  further 
into  the  country ; for  he  would  then  have  picked  up  some 
soldiers  like  himself : so  Bravo  said  that  it  was  not  well  for 
him  or  his  reputation,  nor  for  that  of  the  city,  to  be  back- 


THE  CllUIZE  OF 


m 

ward  in  the  least,  in  such  zeal  as  they  had  already  shown 
for  the  service  of  their  king.  He  took  the  arrangement  on 
himself,  and  ordered  those  who  had  been  named,  to  be  ready 
the  next  day  early  in  the  morning,  and  he  resolved  to  take 
by  force,  such  as  did  not  go  willingly  ; so  that  the  few  who 
had  made  these  excuses,  seeing  the  governor’s  resolution, 
conformed  to  the  wishes  of  the  others,  and  they  all  left  at 
daylight  on  the  following  morning  for  Tocuyo,  in  the  name 
of  his  majesty,  and  with  their  banner  flying.  Journeying 
rapidly,  they  arrived  at  their  destination  in  a few  days,  where 
they  were  much  required. 

4.  The  traitor  Aguirre  had  hopes,  during  the  night  when 
he  was  encamped  on  the  sea-shore  in  the  port  of  Burburata 
(as  had  happened  when  he  landed  at  the  port  of  Margarita), 
that  the  inhabitants  would  pay  him  a visit,  and,  like  the 
others,  bring  him  some  presents,  to  appease  him,  and  induce 
him  not  to  commit  crimes,  as  he  had  done  up  to  the  pre- 
sent time.  But  the  night  having  passed  without  anything 
having  taken  place,  at  daybreak  on  Monday,  the  8th  of 
September,  he  sent  a party  of  his  picked  friends  to  the  town, 
to  examine  it,  and  ascertain  the  views  of  the  inhabitants, 
also  to  bring  back  with  them  to  camp,  such  fresh  provisions 
as  they  could  lay  their  hands  on. 

Aguirre’s  men,  on  their  arrival  at  the  town,  found  it 
abandoned,  and  only  one  soldier  there,  named  Francisco 
Martin,  a pilot,  who  had  left  Margarita  for  Maracapana,  with 
Captain  Monguia,  and  the  other  soldiers,  who  had  passed 
over  to  the  provincial.  He  had  remained  on  land,  desirous 
of  returning  to  the  traitor  again.  This  pilot,  although  he 
had  fled  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  port  of  Burburata,  on 
Aguirre’s  arrival,  had,  as  soon  as  he  could  slip  away  from 
them,  returned  to  the  town  to  await  his  old  companions,  and 
he  showed  great  signs  of  joy  on  the  arrival  of  the  Mara- 
hones.  He  returned  with  them  to  the  camp  on  the  sea- 
shore, and,  in  the  presence  of  Aguirre,  offered  his  services 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


173 


afresh.  Aguirre  accepted  them  with  pleasure,  embracing 
him,  thanking  him  for  his  constancy  in  following  him,  and 
declaring  that  he  should  be  well  cared  for. 


CHAP.  XLI. 

1.  Aguirre  is  informed  that  some  soldiers,  who  are  friendly  to  him,  are  in 
that  part  of  the  country.  He  sends  in  search  of  them. — 2.  The  traitor 
kills  a soldier.  He  burns  his  vessels , and  takes  up  his  quarters  in  the 
town. — 3.  The  soldiers  look  about  for  horses,  so  as  to  sally  forth  with 
them.  The  traitor  declares  war  against  the  king  of  Gastille. — 4.  The 
whole  country  is  in  a state  of  ferment  ; the  robberies  of  the  soldiers  ; 
they  find  the  alcalde,  and  a tradesman  of  the  town.  Aguirre  sends  to 
the  town  of  Valencia  for  horses. 

1.  The  traitor,  having  pleased  this  Francisco  Martin  with 
words  and  acts,  and  having  treated  him  as  he  did  the  other 
malefactors  who  were  loyal  to  him,  began  to  ask  him  how  it 
was  that  he  and  the  others  abandoned  him,  and  went  over 
to  the  provincial,  in  Maracapana.  Martin  tried  to  satisfy 
Aguirre,  and  to  prove  himself  innocent,  and  that  it  had  never 
crossed  his  thoughts  to  be  a traitor  ; saying  that  Pedro  de 
Monguia,  Artiaga,  and  Rodrigo  Gutierrez  had  deceived  him 
as  well  as  his  companions,  and,  first  carefully  taking  their 
arms  from  them  one  by  one,  had  entered  the  port,  and, 
when  near  enough  for  the  provincial  to  hear  them,  had 
shouted  “ Long  live  the  king,”  and  given  themselves  up. 
Martin  said  he  could  not  prevent  this,  neither  could  his 
companions,  for  they  were  disarmed.  Nevertheless,  they 
did  not  enter  the  service  of  the  provincial,  as  could  be  seen  ; 
and,  when  the  provincial  came  to  this  port,  they  had  escaped 
from  him,  their  intention  being  to  wait  for  Aguirre,  should 


174 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


he  come  there,  and  choose  to  receive  them  back.  He  added 
that  he  alone  had  shown  diligence  in  returning  to  the 
town,  that  the  others  were  in  the  woods,  rather  persecuted 
by  the  inhabitants,  and  that  they  were  in  a most  miserable 
condition,  almost  without  raiment,  and  starving  : thus,  with- 
out doubt  they  would  return  to  Aguirre’s  service,  when  they 
knew  that  he  was  there.  This  recital  gave  great  joy  to  the 
traitor,  for  he  now  knew  that  he  had  people  of  his  party  in 
Tierra  Firme.  He  gave  Martin  a good  suit  of  clothes,  and 
handed  him  a letter,  full  of  the  most  friendly  offers  to  the 
others,  despatching  him  in  search  of  those  who  were  in  the 
woods,  to  read  the  letter  to  them,  and  to  tell  them  how 
desirous  he  was  to  serve  and  favour  them. 

2.  Francisco  Martin  made  strict  search,  and,  being  un- 
able to  find  them,  he  returned  to  Aguirre’s  camp,  where 
he  remained,  aiding  in  the  cruelties  committed  by  the 
rest,  until  he  received  his  merited  payment  in  a miserable 
death. 

In  continuation  of  crimes,  such  as  he  had  committed  in 
the  island  of  Margarita,  Aguirre  caused  one  of  those  soldiers 
to  be  killed,  who  had  joined  him  in  the  island.  The  victim 
was  a Portuguese,  named  Antonio  Farias,  and  he  was  mur- 
dered for  having  asked,  when  he  stepped  on  shore,  if  it 
was  an  island  or  the  main  land. 

It  was  now  past  mid-day,  and  all  hands  had  landed  from 
the  vessels  that  had  been  brought  by  Aguirre,  so  he  deter- 
mined to  take  up  his  quarters  in  the  town,  he  and  some  of 
his  particular  friends  remaining  behind  to  burn  the  ships,  which 
was  done,  the  object  now  being  to  afford  no  opportunity  for 
any  of  his  followers  to  desert.  He  then  went  to  the  town 
(leaving  the  ships  on  fire),  where  he  took  up  his  residence, 
taking  greater  care  than  he  had  hitherto  done  of  the  safety 
of  his  person,  for  he  feared  that  some  soldier  or  another,  find- 
ing himself  on  the  main  land,  might  kill  him  and  easily 
escape,  an  end  the  tyrant  merited  for  his  crimes. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


175 


Still,  he  need  not  have  had  these  suspicions,  for  his 
followers  were  desirous  of  committing  all  sorts  of  horrors, 
and  of  having  such  a chief  to  command  and  assist  them,  who 
would  be  the  more  satisfied  the  greater  the  crimes,  and  they 
knew  it  would  be  impossible  to  find  such  another  sanguinary 
commander. 

S.  As  this  locality  did  not  quite  suit  the  traitor,  he  sent 
out  parties  of  his  soldiers  to  hunt  up  horses,  so  as  to  prose- 
cute their  march.  Although  they  used  their  best  efforts, 
they  could  only  collect  twenty-five  or  thirty  saddle  horses, 
the  rest  being  unbroken  mares. 

The  inhabitants  had  counselled  the  Indians  to  beset  the 
route  of  Aguirre’s  followers  with  poisoned  arrows,  which 
brought  them  to  death’s  door.  They  returned  to  Aguirre, 
who,  to  show  his  sorrow  for  the  sufferings  of  his  men,  began 
to  excite  himself,  and  get  into  a towering  rage,  uttering  a 
thousand  blasphemies  against  God  and  his  saints,  also  a 
thousand  threats  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  town,  and  he 
commanded  a proclamation  to  go  forth,  declaring  a war  of 
fire  and  blood  against  the  king  of  Castille  and  his  vassals, 
with  pain  of  death  to  any  of  his  soldiers  who  did  not  execute 
this  bloody  mandate,  only  excepting  those  who  came  to  serve 
him  voluntarily,  and  with  pleasure.  This  war  was  solemnly 
proclaimed  through  all  the  streets  of  the  town,  to  the  sound 
of  trumpets  and  kettle-drums. 

4.  The  traitor,  having  given  permission  to  the  soldiers 
most  in  his  confidence,  to  go  out  and  pillage,  amongst  other 
places  they  came  to  the  estate  of  one  Benito  Chaves,  an  alcalde, 
four  leagues  from  the  town,  who  was  there  with  his  wife,  and 
a daughter,  married  to  one  Julian  de  Mendoza.  They  left 
the  women,  robbing  what  they  could,  and  taking  the  alcalde 
to  Aguirre ; so  that  he  might  give  an  account  of  the  coun- 
try, and  of  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants. 

Other  soldiers  laid  hands  on  one  Pedro  Nunez,  a trades- 
man, who,  on  being  brought  before  the  traitor,  was  asked 


176 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


why  all  the  people  had  fled  from  the  town.  The  man  re- 
plied that  it  was  from  the  fear  they  had  of  him.  Aguirre  then 
asked  him  to  say  what  they  thought  of  him  and  his  follow- 
ers ; but  Nunez,  suspecting  the  object  of  this  question, 
excused  himself  from  answering,  saying  that  he  did  not 
exactly  know.  Aguirre  resumed  his  inquiry,  telling  him  to 
answer  without  any  fear,  and  that  no  harm  should  come  to 
him,  on  account  of  any  statement  he  might  make. 

The  poor  tradesman,  being  thus  pressed,  replied  that  the 
inhabitants  believed  that  his  worship  and  his  followers  were 
cruel  Lutherans.  This  caused  Aguirre  to  become  inflamed 
with  anger,  and,  taking  off  his  helmet,  he  threatened  to 
throw  it  at  him,  saying,  ts  Stupid  barbarian ! and  art  thou 
such  an  ass  as  to  believe  this  ? I do  not  dash  my  helmet 
at  thee,  because  at  some  other  time  I shall  chastise  thee  for 
thy  ignorance,  even  unto  death.” 

It  was  necessary  for  Aguirre  to  remain  in  that  town 
longer  than  he  wished,  so  as  to  break  the  horses  they  had 
stolen,  otherwise  the  animals  would  have  been  no  use  to 
them.  Meanwhile  his  soldiers  committed  every  species  of 
excess,  destroying  all  the  cattle  they  could  lay  hands  on, 
also  all  the  property  of  the  inhabitants  they  could  find, 
some  of  which  had  been  buried ; they  consumed  provi- 
sions and  other  things  with  prodigality,  and  what  they 
could  not  use  they  wasted ; for,  finding  some  pipes 
of  wine,  hidden  under  refuse,  they  brought  them  to 
the  town,  and  cooked  all  their  food  with  wine  ; others 
stood  the  pipes  up,  knocked  the  heads  in,  and  bathed 
themselves  in  the  wine.  These  scenes  gave  Aguirre 
great  pleasure,  and  he  even  amused  himself  in  the  same 
way.  Seeing  how  long  they  were  detained  in  the  town,  he 
wrote  a letter  to  the  inhabitants  of  Valencia,  which  is  seven 
leagues  to  the  east,  in  which  (as  absolute  lord)  he  sent  to 
tell  them  that  he  did  not  intend  to  pass  through  their 
town,  so  as  not  to  delay  his  march  to  the  new  king- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


177 


dom  of  Granada,  and  thence  to  Piru,  but  that  he  was 
desirous  that  each  inhabitant  should  send  him  a horse,  for 
which  he  would  faithfully  pay  the  value,  and  this  he  trusted 
they  would  be  all  of  one  mind  in  doing,  which  would  give 
him  pleasure.  If,  on  the  contrary,  they  did  not  accede  to 
his  demands,  he  and  his  soldiers,  should  they  pass  that  way, 
would  take  vengeance  on  them. 

The  inhabitants  took  no  heed  either  of  his  letter,  or  of  his 
threats. 


CHAP.  XLII. 

I . Aguirre  kills  a tradesman , also  a soldier  in  this  town  of  Burburata.— 
2.  Two  of  his  soldiers  desert  from  him.  lie  begins  his  march  on 
foot , for  want  of  horses. — 3.  Aguirre  leaves  his  camp  on  the  road , 
and  returns  to  Burburata , where  he  gets  drunk  with  his  companions  ; 
three  desert . — 4.  Disturbances  in  the  camp  whilst  Aguirre  was  at 
Burburata , two  soldiers  are  killed.— b.  Opinions  amongst  the  Mara- 
hones  relative  to  the  death  of  one.  The  tyrant  is  informed  of  what 
had  happened , and  returns  to  camp. 

1.  Amongst  the  soldiers  who  were  turning  things  upside 
down  in  the  country,  to  find  occupation  for  their  thievish 
hands,  there  was  one  who  dug  up  a jar  of  olives  belonging  to 
the  tradesman,  named  Pedro  Nunez,  who  was  still  a prisoner. 
He  had  put  some  pieces  of  gold  into  the  jar,  hoping  thus  to 
save  them  ; and,  when  it  came  to  his  knowledge  that  a sol- 
dier had  found  his  hidden  treasure,  he  went  to  Aguirre  and 
besought  him  to  see  that  the  gold  was  given  up  to  him,  as 
the  soldiers  had  eaten  the  olives. 

The  traitor  commanded  the  soldier  to  be  brought  before 
him,  and,  having  asked  him  about  the  jar  of  olives  and  the 
gold,  the  soldier  replied  that  it  was  true  as  to  the  olives,  but 
not  as  regarded  the  gold.  Aguirre  then  asked  the  tradesman 


A A 


178 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


how  the  cover  of  the  jar  was  fastened  on,  when  he  replied, 
before  the  soldier,  that  it  was  sealed  with  pitch.  The  soldier 
swore  this  was  not  the  fact,  and,  to  prove  the  other  had  spoken 
falsely,  he  brought  to  Aguirre  a cover  that  had  been  closed 
with  plaster,  saying  that  this  was  the  cover  the  jar  had  been 
closed  with,  and  not  one  with  pitch ; so  Aguirre,  who  had 
not  forgotten  what  he  had  formerly  said  to  Pedro  Nuilez, 
when  he  wished  to  dash  his  helmet  at  him,  said  that  any  one 
who  could  tell  such  a lie  of  a soldier,  would  lie  as  to  every 
thing  else,  so  he  had  him  strangled. 

On  the  following  day,  a soldier  of  the  Maranones,  named 
Juan  Perez,  feeling  unwell,  left  the  town  and  sat  himself 
by  the  side  of  a clear  running  stream.  When  Aguirre 
passed  that  way,  and  saw  him,  he  said,  “ What  dost  thou  do 
here,  Perez?”  The  soldier  replied  that  he  was  not  well, 
and  was  merely  reposing  there.  Aguirre  observed  that  if 
Perez  was  unwell  he  could  not  continue  the  march,  and  that 
it  would  be  as  well  for  him  to  remain  in  the  town.  Aguirre 
returned  to  the  house,  when  he  commanded  Perez  to  be 
brought  before  him,  saying  that  he  was  not  well,  and  that  it 
would  be  as  well  to  cure  him ; but  instead  of  this,  he  hung 
Perez,  although  great  efforts  were  made  to  save  the  soldier. 
Aguirre  replied  with  great  anger  to  those  who  interceded, 
telling  them  not  to  speak  in  favour  of  any  man  who  was  so 
lukewarm  in  war  ; and  so  he  ordered  a placard  to  be  put  on 
the  dead  man,  notifying  that  he  had  been  executed  for 
being  useless  and  backward.  In  these,  and  other  cruelties, 
the  traitor  and  his  Maranones  passed  the  time  which 
was  requisite  to  get  the  horses  ready  for  the  journey. 

2.  All  being  nearly  ready  to  march  towards  Valencia,  to 
which  place  he  intended  to  go  (probably  because  the  inhabit- 
ants had  refused  to  send  the  horses,  and  had  not  answered  his 
letter),  two  soldiers,  named  Pedro  Arias  de  Almesta,  and 
Diego  de  Alarcon,  disgusted  with  their  position,  and  unsatis- 
fied as  to  their  security  in  regard  to  the  maddened  violence  of 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


179 


Aguirre,  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  as  he  was  on  the  point  of 
starting,  he  would  not  look  after  them  if  they  fled;  so  they  both 
deserted  together.  When  this  was  known  to  the  traitor,  he 
sent  forth  a troop  of  trusty  followers  to  search  for  them,  to 
the  estate  of  the  alcalde  Chaves  (who  was  still  a prisoner  in 
the  town),  and  he  ordered  his  wife  and  daughter  to  be 
brought  in.  They  having  been  brought,  he  ordered  Chaves 
to  go  and  find  the  two  deserters,  and  told  him  that  if  he 
did  not  do  this,  he  would  take  his  wife  and  daughter  with 
him  to  Piru,  but  that  if  he  succeeded,  he  would  restore 
them. 

Having  destroyed  the  town,  he  loaded  the  horses  with 
his  artillery  and  munitions  of  war,  and,  as  their  number 
was  only  just  sufficient  for  this  work,  the  soldiers  had  each 
to  carry  his  own  arms  and  provisions ; so  they  all  sallied 
forth  on  foot,  even  Aguirre’s  own  daughter,  and  the  wife 
and  daughter  of  the  alcalde,  besides  other  females,  who 
had  continued  with  them  since  they  had  left  Piru. 

Aguirre  left  three  sick  soldiers  in  the  town,  namely,  Juan 
de  Paredes,  Francisco  Marquina,  and  Alonzo  Ximenez,  who, 
being  unable  to  proceed,  had  to  be  left  behind.  This  was 
considered  a marked  favour  on  the  part  of  Aguirre,  that, 
now  being  worn  out  and  useless,  he  did  not  hang  them ; 
perhaps  it  was  because  they  had  been  his  accomplices  in  all 
his  cruelties. 

8.  They  were  all  marching  on  foot,  at  no  great  dis- 
tance from  the  town,  and  going  up  a hilly  track,  when  they 
descried  a piragua  in  which  some  Spaniards  came,  bound 
for  the  port,  and  the  traitor,  putting  his  trust  in  no  one  (for 
his  bad  conscience  gave  him  mortal  fears),  determined  to  re 
turn  to  the  town,  and  get  hold  of  those  who  came  in  the 
piragua.  So  he  continued  his  march  quickly  up  the  hilly 
route,  and  on  the  descent  on  the  other  side  he  halted  his 
men,  so  that  they  could  not  be  seen  from  the  port.  Here  he 
left  his  party  in  charge  of  his  great  friend,  J uan  de  Aguirre, 


180 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


his  majordomo,  with  orders  that  no  one  was  to  move  from 
that  spot  until  he  returned. 

At  nightfall,  he  took  with  him  twenty-five  or  thirty 
arquebusiers  (cross-bowmen),  trusted  friends,  and  returned 
to  the  town,  when  they  began  to  ransack  the  houses,  and 
search  for  the  people  who  came  in  the  piragua,  and  not  find- 
ing them  they  took  possession  of  one  of  the  houses,  and  sat 
themselves  down  to  supper,  on  what  they  had  brought  with 
them ; but  they  drank  so  much  wine  from  a pipe  that  had 
been  left,  that  all  the  soldiers  were  half  drunk,  but  Aguirre 
was  dead  drunk.  Now  would  have  been  the  moment  to  kill 
the  traitor,  for  there  were  none  to  defend  him,  all  being  under 
the  influence  of  drink. 

Subsequently  his  more  sober  companions  were  glad  that 
they  did  not  kill  him,  as  it  was  not  God’s  will  that  Aguirre 
should  die  then. 

This  drinking  bout  turned  out  well,  for  three  soldiers, 
named  Rosales,  Acosta,  and  Jorge  de  Rodas,  during  the  dark 
hours  of  the  night,  left  the  party  and  deserted.  These  were 
sought  after  but  not  found,  although  they  merely  hid  them- 
selves in  the  town,  in  the  hope  that  those  of  the  piragua 
would  come  in  that  night,  or  the  next  morning,  and  take 
them. 

4.  There  were  not  wanting  dissensions  in  the  camp  during 
this  absence  of  Aguirre  in  the  town ; for  on  that  same  day 
(there  being  no  water  in  the  camp,  and  it  being  very  hot, 
their  thirst  caused  them  to  search  for  water),  the  soldiers 
took  vessels  and  went  into  the  woods,  which  were  very 
thick,  in  search  of  water,  at  a distance  from  the  camp  in 
some  little  ravines,  in  which  (they  being  so  secret  and 
narrow,  and  being  apparently  safe  from  the  traitor),  some 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Burburata  were  secreted,  who,  having 
had  information  from  some  Indians,  their  spies,  that  the 
soldiers  were  coming  thither  in  search  of  them,  broke 
up  their  camp  and  went  further  into  the  forests.  The 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


181 


soldiers,  having  arrived  at  the  watering  place,  and  per- 
ceiving fresh  marks  of  people,  sent  some  of  their  Indian 
servants  to  hunt  through  the  woods,  and  see  if  they  could 
not  find  the  people  who  had  left  these  signs.  The  Indians 
began  their  search,  and  far  in  the  interior  of  the  woods 
they  came  upon  some  huts,  where  the  Spaniards  had  been, 
and,  on  examining  these  sylvan  habitations,  many  things 
were  found  belonging  to  the  poor  creatures  who  had  fled 
in  such  haste,  and  amongst  them  a cloak,  which  was  well 
known  to  belong  to  one  Rodrigo  Gutierrez,  one  of  those 
who  had  gone  off  with  Monguia,  and  returned  to  his  alle- 
giance to  the  king,  under  the  provincial. 

They  found,  in  the  cloak,  a deposition  which  Rodrigo 
Gutierrez  had  made  before  the  judge  of  Burburata,  appended 
to  which  there  was  a declaration  against  Aguirre  by  Fran- 
cisco Martin,  a pilot,  corroborating  the  statement  of  Roderigo 
Gutierrez. 

This  cloak  was  brought  into  camp  with  other  articles,  and 
Juan  de  Aguirre,  having  taken  due  note  of  it,  and  seeing 
how  much  all  this  proved  in  regard  to  Francisco  Martin, 
went  to  Francisco  Martin,  who  was  a prisoner  for  an  affair 
he  had  had  with  one  Anton  Garcia,  and  stabbed  him  to 
death,  and  so  he  paid  with  his  life,  for  having  returned  again 
to  his  tyrant  master,  when  God  had  once,  in  his  mercy,  set 
him  free  from  such  companions. 

5.  It  so  happened  that  whilst  they  were  killing  the  soldier, 
and  discharging  an  arquebuss  so  as  to  finish  him  off,  one  of 
the  Marahones,  named  Harana,  wilfully  or  by  accident,  sent 
a ball  at  the  other  soldier,  Anton  Garcia,  who  was  impri- 
soned with  the  pilot,  and  killed  him.  This  caused  much 
consternation  amongst  the  rest  of  the  soldiers,  who  accused 
Flarana  of  having  killed  him  on  purpose,  whilst  others  de- 
fended him,  and  said  that  the  death  was  accidental ; but  he 
gloried  in  the  deed,  and  said  publicly  that  he  had  killed  him 
because  he  was  going  to  run  away  that  night,  that  he  was 


182 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


well  killed,  and  that  he  would  take  the  act  upon  himself,  for 
he  was  sure  that  his  general  would  be  glad  of  it.  But  with 
all  this  Harana  perceived  that  the  dissensions  did  not  cease 
— indeed,  they  increased,  and  there  was  a prospect  of  a re- 
course to  arms.  If  this  had  happened  Juan  de  Aguirre 
would  have  got  the  worst  of  it ; so  he  went  in  haste  to  the 
port  of  Burburata,  to  give  notice  to  the  traitor  of  what  had 
passed  and  was  passing  in  the  camp. 

The  traitor  left  the  town  for  the  camp,  when  the  murdered 
remained  dead,  and  the  living  in  life,  and  what  had  hap- 
pened gave  pleasure  to  Aguirre,  particularly  as  regarded 
the  act  of  his  friend  and  majordomo,  Juan  de  Aguirre. 


CHAP.  XLIII. 

1.  Aguirre  marches , but  with  much  trouble , towards  Valencia.  He  becomes 
ill  on  the  march. — 2.  They  arrive  at  Valencia , and  find  it  deserted 
by  the  inhabitants.  Aguirre  becomes  worse , but  recovers , and  then 
kills  a soldier. — 3.  The  alcalde , Chaves , takes  two  soldiers  in  Bur- 
burata, and  sends  information  to  Aguirre  ; one  of  them  runs  away. 
— 4.  The  traitor  manages  to  lay  hands  on  the  inhabitants  of  Valencia, 
and  on  another  soldier. 

1.  On  the  following  day  Aguirre  went  from  Burburata  to 
his  camp,  and  began  his  march  to  Valencia,  by  very  rough 
roads  indeed,  at  times  being  obliged  to  go  on  hands  and 
feet  in  climbing  the  mountains.  The  laden  horses  suf- 
fered particularly,  they  had  to  lighten  their  burdens,  and, 
as  the  country  was  a very  hot  one,  their  difficulties  were 
increased.  So  Aguirre  ordered  the  soldiers  to  take  the 
baggage  which  the  animals  could  not  carry,  independently 
of  their  provisions  and  knapsacks  ; and  he  also  obliged 
some  of  his  captains,  and  the  principal  persons  of  his  party, 
to  take  a portion  of  the  baggage  which  the  animals  had  been 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


183 


unable  to  carry.  Aguirre  himself  took  more  than  his  share, 
marching  amongst  the  men,  and  crossing  deep  openings  in 
the  hilly  ground,  where  the  horses  had  to  be  unladen  to 
pass  ; and,  in  passing  the  artillery,  they  all  had  to  assist,  so 
great  were  the  difficulties  they  had  to  suffer.  They  were 
eight  days  going  from  Burburata  to  Valencia,  which  brought 
a sickness  upon  Aguirre,  in  consequence  of  the  weight  of 
the  things  he  carried,  and  the  horrid  state  of  the  road. 

On  the  day  he  got  to  Valencia  he  became  much  worse, 
so  that  he  had  to  be  carried  in  a hammock  by  some  Indians, 
whilst  some  soldiers  shaded  him  with  a flag,  and  he  was 
so  out  of  temper,  that  when  he  stopped  under  the  shade 
of  a tree,  he  shouted  to  his  soldiers,  ee  Kill  me,  Mara- 
hones  ! kill  me!”  which  they  might  easily  have  done,  and 
they  were  afterwards  even  sorry  they  did  not  do  so,  for  thus 
they  would  have  escaped  the  punishment  from  their  king, 
which  they  richly  merited  for  their  terrible  crimes. 

2.  When  the  inhabitants  of  Valencia  received  the  news  of 
the  arrival  of  Aguirre  in  the  port  of  Burburata,  they 
gathered  together  what  they  had  in  their  houses,  and,  with 
their  families,  went  in  canoes  to  some  islands  situated  in  a 
large  lake  called  Tarigua,  inhabited  by  friendly  Indians, 
where  they  erected  huts,  so  Aguirre  could  not  lay  hands 
on  them,  and  only  found  their  cattle,  which  he  freely  helped 
himself  to.1  When  some  soldiers,  who  had  been  sent  in 

1 This  lake,  called  Tarigua  by  Padre  Simon,  is  the  lake  of  Valencia, 
or  of  Tacarigua.  It  is  larger  than  the  lake  of  Neufchatel,  the  land 
which  surrounds  it  is  flat  and  even,  and  it  has  fifteen  islands,  which  rise 
up  like  buttresses  from  the  water.  It  is  situated  in  the  rich  valley  of 
Aragua,  which  forms  a basin  between  granite  and  calcareous  mountains 
of  unequal  height,  separating  it  from  the  coast  on  one  side,  and  from 
the  llanos  of  the  interior,  on  the  other.  The  rivers  direct  their  courses 
towards  this  inland  lake,  which  is  closed  in  on  all  sides,  and  are  there 
taken  up  by  evaporation. 

The  town  of  Valencia,  on  the  banks  of  lake  Tacarigua,  was  founded 
in  1555  by  Alonzo  Diaz  Moreno,  and  is  twelve  years  older  than  Carac- 
cas.  It  was  at  first  only  a dependency  of  the  port  of  Burburata. — 
Humboldt. 


184 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


advance,  entered  the  place,  they  found  it  deserted,  and  the 
houses  empty.  They  billetted  themselves  as  they  liked, 
selecting  the  best  habitation  for  Aguirre,  in  which  he  took 
up  his  quarters  the  night  he  arrived.  He  became  very  ill 
here,  and  in  a few  days  he  was  reduced  to  a skeleton,  and 
at  the  point  of  death.  In  this  state  he  could  easily  have  been 
killed  by  any  one,  for  there  were  no  guards  to  watch  over 
him,  and  the  people  went  in  and  out  of  his  quarters  to  see 
him,  as  they  pleased.  However,  after  a time  he  got  better, 
and  the  way  he  showed  his  thanks  to  God,  who  had  spared 
him,  wras  to  utter  blasphemies  against  his  Creator  and  his 
saints,  and  against  the  people  who  had  left  the  place,  calling 
them  barbarians  and  cowards,  for  such  he  said  they  must 
be,  “ for  not  one  soldier  or  Indian  had  joined  his  party, 
which  was  so  honourably  employed  in  warlike  doings,  as 
true  men  who  had  loved  war,  and  followed  the  profession  of 
arms  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  ; war  was  so  honour- 
able a career  that  the  angels  in  heaven  had  had  theirs.”  In 
this  manner  he  jumbled  up  all  sorts  of  absurdities  and 
heresies,  which  were  hateful  even  to  the  ears  of  those 
soldiers  of  the  band  who  were  like  himself. 

The  soldiers,  finding  the  houses  empty,  and  that  there 
wras  nothing  in  them  to  destroy,  burnt  them  to  ashes.  They 
also  laid  hands  upon  the  cattle  for  food,  and  on  the  horses  to 
ride,  and  to  carry  their  baggage  and  warlike  stores.  The 
traitor,  having  somewhat  recovered,  issued  a proclamation 
that  no  soldier  should  go  further  from  the  town  than  within 
gun-shot,  without  his  permission,  under  pain  of  death.  This 
was  a net,  in  which  he  knew  he  would  catch  some  of  them, 
and  thus  shed  blood,  for  it  appeared  to  him,  in  consequence 
of  his  sickness,  that  too  many  days  had  passed  without  an 
execution. 

It  so  happened  that  a soldier  named  Gonzalo,  who  had  the 
post  of  paymaster  (this  office  was  nominal,  for  the  only  pay- 
ment in  that  camp  was  that  which  each  man  purloined), 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


185 


and  to  whose  knowledge  the  proclamation  had  not  come, 
left  the  town  without  his  license,  to  catch  some  parrots ; and 
for  this  offence  Gonzalo  was  killed,  the  moment  Aguirre 
was  made  aware  of  his  having  done  so. 

S.  Chaves,  the  alcalde  of  Burburata,  was  very  anxious 
to  find  the  two  soldiers  who  had  deserted  from  Aguirre,  for 
the  traitor  had  taken  his  wife  and  daughter  with  him  as 
hostages,  until  the  soldiers  were  found.  He  was  assisted 
in  the  search  by  his  son-in-law,  Don  Julian  de  Mendoza,  his 
friends  and  servants.  After  a time  the  soldiers  were  found, 
and,  being  chained,  Mendoza  was  charged  to  take  them  to 
Aguirre,  and  so  liberate  his  wife  and  mother-in-law.  They 
started,  but  Pedro  Arias  became  so  cast  down  with  fear,  at 
the  thoughts  of  the  rigorous  punishment  to  be  expected  from 
Aguirre,  that,  whilst  on  the  journey,  he  threw  himself  on  the 
ground,  saying  that  he  would  go  no  farther.  Don  Julian 
observed  that  such  a determination  was  of  little  consequence 
to  him,  for  that  the  head  of  the  deserter  would  be  sufficient  for 
Aguirre.  The  soldier  replied  that  Don  Julian  might  cut  it 
off*  if  he  thought  fit,  but  that  he  would  not  move  from  that 
spot.  But  Don  Julian  was  serious  in  his  view  of  the  case, 
and,  without  more  ado,  he  drew  his  sword  with  one  hand, 
and  with  the  other,  lifting  up  the  soldier's  beard,  began 
cutting  his  throat.  The  soldier  Pedro  Arias,  feeling  that 
Don  Julian  was  in  earnest,  implored  him  to  desist,  promising 
to  do  his  best  in  going  onwards,  although  seriously 
wounded. 

At  last  they  arrived  at  Valencia,  when  the  deserters  were 
exchanged  for  the  two  women.  Aguirre  immediately 
ordered  Diego  de  Alarcon  to  be  hung  and  quartered.  The 
culprit  was  dragged  through  the  streets,  the  common  crier 
shouting,  “ This  is  the  sentence  commanded  to  be  put  into 
execution  by  Lope  de  Aguirre,  the  great  chief  of  the  noble 
Maranones,  on  this  man,  because  he  is  a faithful  vassal  of 
the  king  of  Castille,  that  he  be  dragged  to  the  place  of  exe- 


186 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


cution,  hung,  and  quartered ; and  such  is  the  fate  of  those 
who  act  like  him.”  His  head  was  cut  off,  and  placed  on  the 
rollo  which  was  in  the  plaza.  Aguirre,  passing  by  this 
spot,  and  seeing  the  head,  shouted,  with  a devilish  laugh, 
Cf  Ah  ! are  you  there,  friend  Alarcon  ? How  is  it  the  king 
of  Castille  comes  not  to  bring  thee  to  life?”  With  regard  to 
the  other  soldier,  Pedro  Arias  de  Almete,  as  he  was  a good 
penman,  and  as  Aguirre  required  him  as  his  secretary, 
he  was  not  executed,  hut  attention  was  paid  to  the  curing  of 
his  wounds.  This  was  looked  upon  as  a miracle,  because  for 
much  less  things  than  desertion,  Aguirre  hung  his  followers 
in  pairs. 

4.  The  traitor  now  ordered  Christoval  Garcia,  a ship 
caulker,  with  a party  of  soldiers,  to  do  their  best  in  getting  to 
the  island  where  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  had  taken  refuge, 
to  lay  hands  on  all  the  effects  they  could,  and  to  bring  them 
to  Aguirre.  Garcia  started,  and  arrived  at  the  lake,  which 
was  deep,  but  he  found  no  means  of  getting  to  the  island. 
He  did  his  best  to  make  rafts  of  canes,  but,  on  embarking, 
they  settled  down  on  one  side,  and  let  their  cargo  into 
the  water ; and,  as  Garcia  saw  no  other  mode  of  accomplish- 
ing his  object,  he  returned  to  the  town.  This  unsuccessful 
operation  vexed  Aguirre  much,  particularly  as  his  men  had 
been  unable  to  lay  hands  on  any  of  the  inhabitants.  He 
was,  however,  somewhat  appeased  by  receiving  a letter 
from  Chaves,  the  alcalde  of  Burburata,  in  which  he  stated 
that,  desiring  to  serve  him,  he  had  imprisoned  Bodrigo 
Gutierrez,  who  was  the  owner  of  the  cloak  in  which  the 
deposition  had  been  found,  and  one  of  the  three  soldiers 
who,  with  Captain  Monguia,  had  been  the  cause  of  the  deser- 
tion of  the  party  to  the  king’s  side  at  Maracapana,  and  who 
also  had  remained  in  Burburata  when  the  father  provincial 
arrived ; and  that,  if  Aguirre  sent  immediately  for  him,  he 
should  be  given  up.  This  information  delighted  the  traitor, 
and  he  sent  off  Francisco  Carrion,  his  principal  alguazil, 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


187 


with  twelve  soldiers  to  fetch  the  deserter.  Gutierrez,  having 
been  informed  of  what  Chaves  had  done,  fled  to  the  church ; 
and  Carrion  tried  to  get  him  out,  but  the  priest  defended 
the  man ; so  the  alcalde  was  imprisoned,  and  guards  were 
set  over  him.  This,  however,  gave  time  for  Gutierrez  to 
get  rid  of  his  chains,  and  fly  for  safety  to  the  woods. 
The  alcalde  feared  for  his  own  life,  for  having  disappointed 
Aguirre  of  another  victim;  however,  the  alguazil  and  his 
men  returned  to  the  traitor,  who,  on  hearing  of  this  un- 
successful result,  was  very  angry  with  the  alguazil,  par- 
ticularly for  not  killing  Chaves,  in  revenge  for  the  escape 
of  the  soldier. 


CHAP.  XLIY. 

1.  The  traitor  allows  the  'priest  of  Margarita  to  return  to  his  dwelling , on 
condition  that  he  forwards  a letter  Aguirre  had  written  to  the  Icing. 
— 2.  The  alcalde  of  Burburata  informs  the  traitor  as  to  the  pre- 
parations the  governor  is  making  to  oppose  him:  Aguirre  kills  three 
soldiers. — 3.  A sentinel  informs  the  town  of  Barquicimeto , that 
Aguirre  is  marching  on  it,  the  inhabitants  fly. — 4.  Ten  of  Aguirre's 
soldiers  desert  on  the  march,  at  which  he  becomes  very  wroth,  and 
utters  ten  thousand  blasphemies,  as  was  his  custom, 

1.  Aguirre  had  brought  Father  Pedro  Contreras,  the 
priest  of  Margarita,  with  him  to  Valencia,  who  had  often 
begged  to  be  allowed  to  return  to  his  flock.  In  the  end  this 
was  conceded,  but  he  was  made  to  take  his  oath  that  he 
would  cause  a letter  written  by  the  traitor  to  be  sent  to  the 
king  of  Castille,  and,  if  the  letter  could  not  be  forwarded 
at  once  from  Margarita,  to  send  it  to  the  Poyal  Audience 
of  Santo  Domingo,  or  by  any  other  channel,  provided  it 
reached  the  hands  of  the  king.  The  priest  at  first  objected 
to  take  the  oath,  but  seeing  how  important  it  was  for 
him  to  escape  from  the  traitor,  and  thus  save  his  life,  he  did 


188 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


so.  He  returned  to  the  port,  and  thence  to  the  island  of 
Margarita,  and  did  his  best  to  forward  the  letter  to  the 
king,  although  it  was  a most  audacious  piece  of  com- 
position, and  as  full  of  absurdities  as  the  individual  who  had 
written  it,  for  in  it  he  showed  his  little  talent  and  sense,  but 
the  cruelty  of  his  disposition  was  most  apparent.  The  letter 
began  thus  : ec  King  Philip,  a Spaniard,  son  of  Charles  the 
invincible,  etc.”;  but  we  will  not  extract  more,  as  its  extra- 
vagancies are  not  worth  printing : however,  many  copies  of 
the  said  letter  are  to  be  found  in  these  countries  of  the  Indies 
and  other  parts,  some  of  which  I have  seen.1 

[Francisco  Vasquez , MS.  Relacion , pp.  79-86.  “ At 

this  time  the  tyrant  wrote  a letter  to  the  king  Don  Philip, 
our  lord,  which  was  as  evil  and  shameful  as  himself.” 

LETTER  FROM  THE  TYRANT  LOPE  DE  AGUIRRE  TO 
KING  PHILIP  II. 

“ King  Philip,  a Spaniard,  son  of  Charles  the  Invincible! 
I,  Lope  de  Aguirre,  thy  vassal,  am  an  old  Christian,  of  poor 
but  noble  parents,  and  native  of  the  town  of  Ohate,  in 
Biscay.  In  my  youth  I crossed  the  ocean  to  the  land  of 
Peru,  lance  in  hand,  to  perform  what  is  due  from  an  honest 
man,  and,  during  fifty-four  years,  I have  done  thee  great 
service  in  Peru,  in  the  conquest  of  the  Indians,  in  forming 
settlements,  and  especially  in  battles  and  encounters  which 
I have  fought  in  thy  name,  always  to  the  best  of  my  power 

1 Old  Father  Simon’s  loyalty  was  horrified  at  the  idea  of  printing 
Aguirre’s  treasonable  letter  to  the  king  of  Spain.  A copy  is  now,  how- 
ever, inserted  in  this  translated  edition  of  his  text,  taken  from  the 
manuscript  narrative  of  Francisco  Vasquez,  one  of  Aguirre’s  followers  ; 
and  no  scruple  is  felt  in  doing  so,  because  Simon’s  account  of  Aguirre’s 
cruize  is  copied  almost  word  for  word  from  Vasquez,  without  any 
acknowledgment. 

There  is  another  copy  of  this  very  curious  letter,  somewhat  abridged, 
in  La  Historia  de  Venezuela  por  Don  Jose  de  Oviedo  y Banos  (1723), 
lib.  i v,  cap.  vii,  p.  206  ; which  appears  to  have  been  taken  from  some 
other  manuscript,  and  not  from  that  of  Vasquez.  Humboldt  (in  his 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


189 


and  ability,  without  asking  thy  officers  for  payment,  as  will 
appear  by  thy  royal  books. 

“ I firmly  believe  that  thou,  O Christian  king  and  lord, 
hast  been  very  cruel  and  ungrateful  to  me  and  my  com- 
panions for  such  good  service,  and  that  all  those  who  write 
to  thee  from  this  land  deceive  thee  much,  because  thou 
seest  things  from  too  far  off.  I,  and  my  companions  (whose 
names  I will  mention  presently),  no  longer  able  to  suffer 
the  cruelties  which  thy  judges  and  governors  exercise  in  thy 
name,  are  resolved  to  obey  thee  no  longer.  We  regard  our- 
selves no  longer  as  Spaniards.  We  make  a cruel  war  on 
thee,  because  we  will  not  endure  the  oppression  of  thy 
ministers,  who,  to  give  places  to  their  nephews  and  their 
children,  dispose  of  our  lives,  our  reputations,  and  our  for- 
tunes. I am  lame  in  the  left  foot,  from  two  shots  of  an 
arquebus,  which  I received  in  the  battle  of  Chucuinga,1 
fighting  under  the  orders  of  the  marshal  Alonzo  de  Alva- 
rado, against  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  a rebel,  as  I and 
my  companions  are  now,  and  will  be  until  death  : for  we 
now  know,  in  this  country,  how  cruel  thou  art,  that  thou 
art  a breaker  of  thy  faith  and  word  ; therefore,  even  if  we 
received  thy  pardon,  we  should  give  less  credence  to  it, 
than  to  the  books  of  Martin  Luther. 

“ Thy  viceroy,  the  marquis  of  Canete,  a bad,  effeminate, 

Narrative,  iv,  p.  257,  note  a,)  has  made  some  extracts  from  the  version 
of  Oviedo  ; and  Southey  (who  had  never  seen  either  the  work  of  Oviedo, 
or  the  manuscript  of  Vasquez),  in  his  account  of  Aguirre’s  voyage, 
copied  these  extracts  from  Humboldt’s  Narrative.  Piedrahita  had 
never  seen  a copy  of  the  letter. 

Oviedo  y Banos  thus  introduces  this  strange  epistle.  “ Though  the 
letter  delivered  by  Lope  de  Aguirre  to  Padre  Contreras,  to  be  trans- 
mitted to  the  king,  really  does  not  deserve  notice,  yet,  as  a specimen  of 
the  madness  of  that  man,  we  refer  to  it,  that  the  reader  may  be  amused 
for  a moment  by  this  fine  letter,  as  being  dictated  by  an  owner  of  mules.” 

1 Oviedo  y Banos,  in  copying  this  letter,  has  put  Valley  of  Coquimbo, 
instead  of  Battle  of  Chucuinga.  Humboldt,  in  the  extracts  he  made, 
has  followed  him,  and  Southey  copied  from  Humboldt.  Chucuinga  or 
Chuquinga  is  in  the  Andes,  between  Nasca  and  Lucanas. 


190 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


and  ambitious  tyrant,  hung  Martin  de  Robles,  a man  who  had 
been  distinguished  in  thy  service,  and  the  ill  fated  Alonzo 
Diaz,  who  had  laboured  harder  in  the  discovery  of  Peru, 
than  the  tribes  which  followed  Moses ; and  Piedrahita,  a 
good  captain,  who  fought  many  battles  in  thy  service ; and 
it  was  these  men  who  procured  a victory  for  thee  in  Pucara; 
for,  had  it  been  otherwise,  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron 
would  now  be  sovereign  of  Peru.  Do  not  put  any  faith  in 
the  accounts  of  services  which  thy  judges  declare  they  have 
performed,  because  they  are  great  fables,  unless  they  call 
having  spent  800,000  dollars  out  of  the  Royal  Treasury,  a 
service.  Chastise  them  for  their  vices  and  evil  deeds,  for 
evil  doers  they  certainly  are. 

“ Hear  me ! O hear  me  ! thou  king  of  Spain.  Be  not 
cruel  to  thy  vassals,  for  it  was  while  thy  father,  the  emperor 
Charles,  remained  quietly  in  Spain,  that  they  procured  for 
thee  so  many  kingdoms  and  vast  countries.  Remember, 
king  Philip,  that  thou  hast  no  right  to  draw  revenues  from 
these  provinces,  since  their  conquest  has  been  without  dan- 
ger to  thee.  I take  it  for  certain  that  few  kings  go  to  hell, 
only  because  they  are  few  in  number  ; but  that  if  there  were 
many,  none  of  them  would  go  to  heaven.  For  I believe 
that  you  are  all  worse  than  Lucifer,  and  that  you  hunger 
and  thirst  after  human  blood ; and  further,  I think  little  of 
you,  and  despise  you  all,  nor  do  I look  upon  your  government 
as  more  than  an  air  bubble.  Know  that  I,  and  my  two 
hundred  arquebus-bearing  Maranones,  have  taken  a solemn 
oath  to  God,  that  we  will  not  leave  one  of  thy  ministers 
alive.  We  consider  ourselves,  at  this  moment,  the  happiest 
men  on  earth,  because,  in  this  land  of  the  Indians,  we  pre- 
serve the  faith  and  the  commandments  of  God  in  their 
purity,  and  we  maintain  all  that  is  preached  by  the  Church 
of  Rome.  We  expect,  though  sinners  in  this  life,  to  endure 
martyrdom  for  the  laws  of  God. 

“ On  leaving  the  river  of  Amazons,  which  is  called  Mara- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


191 


non,  we  came  to  an  island  inhabited  by  Christians,  called 
Margarita,  where  we  received  news  from  Spain  of  the  great 
conspiracy  of  the  Lutherans,  which  caused  us  much  terror 
and  alarm.  In  our  company  there  was  one  of  these  Lu- 
therans, named  Monteverde,1  and  I ordered  him  to  be  cut 
to  pieces.  Believe  me,  O most  excellent  king,  that  I will 
force  all  men  to  live  perfectly  in  the  faith  of  Christ. 

“ The  corruption  of  the  morals  of  the  monks  is  so  great  in 
this  land,  that  it  is  necessary  to  chastise  it  severely.  There 
is  not  an  ecclesiastic  here,  who  does  not  think  himself  higher 
than  the  governor  of  a province.  I beg  of  thee,  O great 
king,  not  to  believe  what  the  monks  tell  thee  in  Spain. 
They  are  always  talking  of  the  sacrifices  they  make,  as  well 
as  of  the  hard  and  bitter  life  they  lead  in  America.  Be 
assured  that  when  they  shed  tears  there,  in  thy  royal  pre- 
sence, it  is  that  here  they  may  be  the  more  powerful. 
Wouldst  thou  know  the  life  which  they  lead  here  ? they  are 
engaged  in  trade,  striving  for  benefices,  selling  the  sacra- 
ments of  the  church  for  a price,  enemies  of  the  poor,  avari- 
cious, gluttonous,  and  proud  to  that  degree  that,  at  the  least, 
every  friar  pretends  to  rule  and  govern  all  these  lands. 
They  never  desire  to  preach  to  any  poor  Indian,  yet  they 
are  possessed  of  the  best  estates.  The  life  they  lead  is 
surely  a hard  one,  for  does  not  each  of  them,  as  a penance, 
have  a dozen  girls,  and  as  many  boys,  who  catch  fish,  kill 
partridges,  and  gather  fruit  for  them.  Remedy  this,  O king 
and  lord,  or  else,  I swear  to  thee,  on  the  faith  of  a Chris- 
tian, that  heaven  will  punish  thee,  and  great  scandals  will 
follow.  I say  this  to  let  thee  know  the  truth,  though  neither 
I,  nor  my  companions,  either  desire  or  hope  for  thy  mercy. 

“ Thy  judges,  too,  each  have  4,000  dollars  a-year,  besides 

1 Monteverde,  who  appears  to  have  been  a Fleming,  was  murdered 
long  before  Aguirre  reached  Margarita.  See  p.  101.  The  blood-thirsty 
maniac  had  committed  so  many  murders,  that  he  had  forgotten  the 
order  in  which  they  came. 


192 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


8,000  for  expenses,  and,  at  the  end  of  three  years,  each  of 
them  has  60,000  dollars,  besides  land  and  other  property. 
Notwithstanding  all  this  we  should  be  content  to  submit  to 
them,  if,  for  our  sins,  they  did  not  force  us  to  bow  down  and 
worship  them,  like  Nebuchadnezzar.  This  is  insufferable. 

“ Alas ! alas ! what  a misfortune  it  is  that  the  emperor, 
thy  father,  has  conquered  Germany  at  such  a price,  and  has 
spent,  in  that  conquest,  the  money  that  we  procured  for  him 
in  these  very  Indies  ! Most  excellent  king  and  lord,  Ger- 
many was  conquered  by  arms,  and  Germany  has  conquered 
Spain  by  her  vices,  of  which  we  are  here  well  rid,  and  are 
content  with  a little  maize  and  water. 

“ Let  wars  spread  where  they  may,  and  where  men  carry 
them,  yet  at  no  time  will  we  cease  to  be  obedient  to  the 
holy  church  of  Rome.  We  cannot  believe,  O excellent 
king  and  lord ! that  thou  canst  be  so  cruel  to  such  good 
vassals  as  thou  hast  in  these  parts ; and  I therefore  desire 
that  thou  mayst  know  what  thy  ministers  do  without  thy 
consent.  Near  the  city  of  the  kings,1  and  close  to  the  sea, 
some  lakes  were  discovered  where  fish  were  preserved ; and 
thy  wicked  judges,  for  their  own  profit,  rented  them  in  thy 
name,  giving  out  that  this  was  done  with  thy  consent.  If 
this  be  so,  for  the  love  of  God  allow  us  to  have  some  of  the 
fish,  for  it  was  us  who  discovered  the  lakes.2  Surely  the 
king  of  Castille  is  not  in  need  of  four  hundred  dollars, 
which  is  the  sum  for  which  these  lakes  are  rented  : and,  O 
most  illustrious  king  ! it  is  not  in  Cordova  nor  in  Valladolid 
that  we  ask  for  this  property.  Deign  to  dole  out  charity, 
my  lord,  to  the  poor  men  who  have  laboured  in  this  land ; 

1 Lima. 

u These  are,  no  doubt,  the  lakes  of  Villa,  near  Chorillos,  and  about 
fifteen  miles  from  Lima ; where  there  is  still  capital  wild  duck  shooting. 
Probably  Aguirre  had  been  punished  for  poaching  on  these  lakes  ; but 
how  strange  that  this  petty  grievance,  of  former  years,  should  have 
occupied  his  mind  under  the  circumstances  in  which  he  was  then 
placed  ! 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


193 


and  remember  that  God  is  the  same  to  all ; that  there  is  the 
same  justice,  the  same  reward,  the  same  heaven,  the  same 
hell,  for  all  mankind. 

“ In  the  year  1559,  the  marquis  of  Canete  entrusted  the 
expedition  of  the  river  of  Amazons  to  Pedro  de  Ursua,  a 
Navarrese,  or  rather  a Frenchman,  who  delayed  the  build- 
ing of  his  vessels  until  1560.  These  vessels  were  built  in 
the  province  of  the  Motilones,  which  is  a wet  country,  and, 
as  they  were  built  in  the  rainy  season,  they  came  to  pieces, 
and  we  therefore  made  canoes,  and  descended  the  river. 
We  navigated  the  most  powerful  river  in  Peru,  and  it 
seemed  to  us  that  we  were  in  a sea  of  fresh  water.  We 
descended  the  river  for  three  hundred  leagues.  This  bad 
governor  was  capricious,  vain,  and  inefficient,  so  that  we 
could  not  suffer  it,  and  we  gave  him  a quick  and  certain  death. 
We  then  raised  a young  gentleman  of  Seville,  named  Don 
Fernando  de  Guzman  to  be  our  king,  and  we  took  the  same 
oaths  to  him  as  are  taken  to  thy  royal  person,  as  may  be 
seen  by  the  signatures  of  all  those  who  are  with  me.  They 
named  me  maestro  del  campo  ; and,  because  I did  not  con- 
sent to  their  evil  deeds,  they  desired  to  murder  me.  I 
therefore  killed  this  new  king,  the  captain  of  his  guard,  his 
lieutenant-general,  four  captains,  his  majordomo,  his  chap- 
lain, who  said  mass,  a woman,  a knight  of  the  Order  of 
Rhodes,  an  admiral,  two  ensigns,  and  five  or  six  of  his  ser- 
vants. It  was  my  intention  to  carry  on  the  war,  on  account 
of  the  many  cruelties  which  thy  ministers  had  committed. 
I named  captains  and  sergeants ; but  these  men  also  wanted 
to  kill  me,  and  I hung  them.  We  continued  our  course 
while  all  this  evil  fortune  was  befalling  us ; and  it  was 
eleven  months  and  a half  before  we  reached  the  mouths  of 
the  river,  having  travelled  for  more  than  a hundred  days, 
over  more  than  fifteen  hundred  leagues.  This  river  has  a 
course  of  two  thousand  leagues  of  fresh  water,  the  greater 
part  of  the  shores  being  uninhabited  ; and  God  only  knows 


194 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


how  we  ever  escaped  out  of  that  fearful  lake.  I advise  thee 
not  to  send  any  Spanish  fleet  up  this  ill-omened  river ; for, 
on  the  faith  of  a Christian,  I swear  to  thee,  O king  and 
lord,  that  if  a hundred  thousand  men  should  go  up,  not  one 
would  escape,  and  there  is  nothing  else  to  expect,  especially 
for  the  adventurers  from  Spain. 

“ The  captains  and  officers  who  are  now  under  my  com- 
mand in  this  enterprise,  and  who  promise  to  die  in  it,  are 
Juan  Jeronimo  de  Espindola,  a Genoese,  captain  of  infantry, 
admiral  Juan  Gomez,  a Spaniard  [then  follows  a long  list], 
and  many  other  gentlemen.  They  pray  to  God  that  thy 
strength  may  ever  be  increased  against  the  Turk  and  the 
Frenchman,  and  all  others  who  desire  to  make  war  against 
thee ; and  we  shall  give  God  thanks  if,  by  our  arms,  we 
attain  the  rewards  which  are  due  to  us,  but  which  thou  hast 
denied  us  ; and,  because  of  thine  ingratitude,  I am  a rebel 
against  thee  until  death. 

(Signed) 

“ Lope  de  Aguirre,  the  Wanderer.” 

2.  The  alcalde,  Chaves,  showed  by  his  conduct  that  he  was 
little  better  than  the  Maranones  and  their  leader,  and  his 
acts  showed  that  he  was  rather  for  Aguirre  than  for  his  king, 
for,  knowing  what  the  Governor  Pablo  Collado  was  doing  in 
Tocuyo,  to  resist  the  traitor,  Chaves  wrote  another  letter  to 
Aguirre  on  this  subject,  also  informing  him  that  the  lieu- 
tenant-general, maestro  del  campo,  and  other  officers,  had 
been  appointed  by  the  governor,  and  that  they  had  pro- 
cured assistance  from  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  with  the 
intention  of  defeating  him  at  Barquicimeto,  or  at  Tocuyo. 

This  was  not  pleasant  news  for  Aguirre,  but  he  was 
obliged  to  Chaves  nevertheless,  and  made  arrangements  to 
leave  his  present  position  at  once,  for  the  above  mentioned 
two  places,  for  he  considered  that  any  delay  on  his  part  would 
be  dangerous,  as  it  would  give  time  for  the  governor  to  col- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


195 


lect  more  forces,  and  obstruct  his  march ; so  he  ordered 
that,  early  on  the  following  day,  they  should  raise  their 
camp  and  leave  Valencia.  On  the  night  previous,  for  fear 
any  of  his  people  should  desert  him,  he  commanded  that  all 
his  soldiers  should  sleep  together  in  an  enclosure  belonging 
to  his  habitation,  whence  they  could  have  escaped  with  the 
same  facility  as  if  they  had  been  in  the  streets,  for  the  walls 
of  the  enclosure  were  only  of  frail  palings.  But  their  desire 
to  continue  this  loose  sort  of  life  prevented  them  from 
leaving  the  company  of  the  traitor. 

Aguirre  determined,  that  night,  to  rid  himself  of  those 
whom  he  considered  would  be  troublesome  to  him  on  his 
march,  namely  three  soldiers  who  had  offended  him,  named 
Benito  Diaz,  Francisco  de  Sosa,  and  another  called  Cegarra. 
The  cause  of  his  anger  with  Diaz  was  that  he  had  said  that 
he  had  a relation  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada ; and,  as 
to  the  others,  it  appeared  to  him  that  they  lent  an  unwilling 
hand  in  warlike  affairs ; so  he  strangled  them  secretly  in  a 
hut  which  was  in  the  enclosure,  and,  in  the  morning,  when  he 
started,  he  ordered  the  hut  to  be  set  on  fire,  so  that  the  three 
bodies  might  be  burnt.  He  also  left  the  town  and  gardens 
in  ruins,  and  destroyed  all  the  cattle.  He  then  departed  with 
his  followers  and  ninety  horses,  proceeding  to  Barquicimeto 
by  the  direct  road,  which  traverses  the  mountains  of  the 
province  of  Nirua,  after  having  been  in  Valencia  fifteen 
days. 

3.  The  people  of  the  two  cities  (by  order  of  the  governor 
Collado)  had  placed  spies  in  proper  places,  to  give  notice 
when  the  traitor  was  advancing.  One  of  these,  the 
moment  he  saw  the  Maranones  enter  the  mountains,  started 
with  great  haste,  and,  as  he  came  running  into  the  city  of 
Barquicimeto,  he  shouted  to  the  people  to  arm  themselves, 
for  that  the  tyrant  was  fast  approaching,  and  that  he  would 
be  there  during  the  day ; but,  as  the  inhabitants  were  unpre- 
pared (all  the  people  of  the  district  were  not  collected 


196 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


together  in  the  town  with  the  general,  Gutierrez  de  la  Pena, 
but  some  were  in  Tocuyo,  making  necessary  arrangements  for 
defeating  Aguirre),  they  fled  to  the  woods,  with  their  wives 
and  children,  taking  such  of  their  property  with  them  as 
they  could,  in  the  confusion  of  their  retreat,  and  leaving  the 
town  empty.  The  traitor  arrived  eight  days  after  the  flight 
of  the  people. 

4.  Aguirre  was  now  in  the  mountains,  the  track  was  bad 
and  rocky,  and  surrounded  by  thick  forests  ; so  some  of  the 
soldiers  thought  this  was  a good  opportunity  to  desert,  from 
such  vile  companions.  Ten  of  them,  one  by  one,  hid  them- 
selves, without  knowing  where  any  of  his  companions  were  ; 
so  that,  when  this  came  to  Aguirre’s  knowledge,  it  was  too 
late  to  catch  them  ; but  he  gave  rein  to  his  pestilent  tongue, 
shouting  a thousand  blasphemies  against  God  and  his  saints, 
as  was  his  custom  when  angered,  casting  his  eyes  to  heaven 
with  threatening  looks,  stamping  wildly  on  the  ground, 
foaming  at  the  mouth,  and  making  vows  of  revenge,  and 
horrid  oaths,  saying,  Ah,  Marahones ! how  true  it  is  what 
I have  said,  that  you  would  leave  me  in  the  hour  of  greatest 
need,  and  that  I should  have  to  fight  alone  with  the  moun- 
tain cats,  and  monkeys  of  the  forests ; better  would  it  have 
been  had  I died  ere  this,  than  that  I should  yield  my  life  to 
these  vile  ones  of  Venezuela  ! Oh,  thou  prophet  Antoni co  ! 
how  well  didst  thou  foresee  the  truth.  Had  I but  believed 
thee,these  Marahones  would  not  have  deserted.”  This  he  said, 
alluding  to  a little  page  that  he  had,  of  whom  he  was  very 
fond,  who  often  told  him  not  to  trust  the  Marahones,  as  they 
would  all  leave  him  when  it  suited  them  to  do  so : so,  when 
any  of  them  ran  away,  he  remembered  the  warnings  of 
Antonico. 

At  this  juncture  Juan  Gomez,  Aguirre’s  admiral,  came  to 
him  and  said,  {(  Body  of  God ! Sehor  general,  why  does  your 
worship  thus  vex  yourself?  The  other  day  three  men  deserted 
us  ; but  if  thirty  had  done  so,  I would  rather  have  had  the 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


197 


room  than  the  company  of  such  fellows,  for  there  would 
have  been  so  many  enemies  less ; but  for  the  love  of  God ! 
there  are  many  and  strong  trees  hereabouts  !”  giving  him  to 
understand  by  this  observation,  that,  as  he  had  executed 
three  of  his  men  before  he  left  Valencia,  he  could  hang 
such  as  he  had  unfavourable  suspicions  of,  and  in  this  way 
rid  himself  of  his  present  fears.  Aguirre  listened  atten- 
tively to  this  advice  of  his  admiral,  but  did  not  consider  it 
politic  to  act  upon  it,  as  it  might  produce  greater  difficulties, 
though  subsequently  he  attempted  such  wholesale  murder. 


CHAP.  XLV. 

].  Aguirre , marching  from  Valencia  to  Barquicimeto , comes  to  a mining 
settlement , where  he  falls  into  some  trouble. — 2.  The  traitor  advances 
to  the  river  of  the  valley  of  the  Damas , where  he  rests  a day. — 3.  Here 
he  determines  to  hill  some  of  his  men , but  does  not  do  so.  One  of  his 
captains  comes  from  Margarita  to  Barquicimeto , and  gives  informa- 
tion as  to  Aguirre's  forces. — 4.  The  maestro  del  campo , Diego  Garcia 
de  Paredes , reconnoitres  the  forces  of  the  traitor. 

1.  Three  days  had  Aguirre  been  on  his  march,  when  he  fell 
in  with  a mining  settlement,  where  gold  was  extracted ; but 
the  inhabitants  and  their  negro  workmen  had  fled.  In  the 
hurry  of  flight  a large  quantity  of  maize  was  left  behind  in  a 
hut,  of  which  Aguirre  was  glad,  for  his  party  wanted  provi- 
sions ; still,  he  would  have  been  better  pleased  had  he  been 
able  to  lay  hands  on  the  negro  miners,  and  add  them  to  a 
party  of  twenty  others  he  had  with  him  under  their  captain, 
for  he  trusted  that  the  negros  wrnuld  be  of  much  use  to  him 
in  his  projected  warlike  encounters,  for  he  had  already  well 
schooled  these  negros,  and  had  told  them  they  were  free. 
He  allowed  them  the  same  licence  as  the  Spaniards,  to  com- 
mit every  species  of  enormity,  and  they  exceeded  the  doings 
of  the  white  men  in  robberies,  cruelties,  and  murders. 


198 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


After  a day’s  rest,  Aguirre  continued  his  route,  when  very 
heavy  rains  fell,  soaking  his  people  to  the  skin,  and  causing 
the  track  up  the  mountains  to  be  so  slippery  that  the  unshod 
laden  animals  were  continually  slipping  and  falling,  and 
even  rolling  backwards,  to  the  great  fticonvenience  of  the 
soldiers. 

At  this  the  furious  Aguirre  suggested  impossible  remedies, 
accompanied  by  a thousand  blasphemies  and  heresies  against 
God  and  his  saints,  concluding  with  the  following : “ Does 
God  think  that  because  it  rains  in  torrents  I am  not  to  go  to 
Piru,  and  destroy  the  world?  He  is  mistaken  in  me.” 
At  last  the  miscreant  became  convinced  that  his  blasphem- 
ous conduct  did  not  aid  the  progress  of  the  laden  animals, 
so  he  ordered  his  soldiers,  by  the  aid  of  hoes,  and  other  in- 
struments, to  cut  steps  in  the  steep  parts  of  the  track,  so  that 
the  animals  might  get  some  sort  of  hold,  and  thus  get  to  the 
top. 

2.  Whilst  the  rear  of  this  piratical  crew  were  occupied  in 
overcoming  the  difficulties  of  the  road,  the  van,  having  no 
baggage,  and  the  track  being  narrow  and  tortuous,  so  that 
they  could  not  see  each  other,  and  being  unmindful  of  the 
delay  there  might  be  in  the  ascent  of  the  baggage  and  ani- 
mals, went  onwards  without  stopping.  On  Aguirre’s  arrival 
at  the  summit,  his  vanguard  was  not  to  be  seen.  This 
threw  him  into  a violent  rage,  and  he  rode  a-head  as  fast 
as  possible,  coming  up  after  a time  with  his  mayordomo  and 
friend,  Juan  de  Aguirre,  and  his  captain  of  the  guard, 
Roberto  de  Susaya,  when  he  said,  “ I predict  to  you, 
senores,  that  if  there  does  not  arrive  amongst  us,  from  this 
district,  forty  or  fifty  soldiers,  I begin  to  perceive  that  in  the 
present  state  of  mind  of  my  Maranones,  we  shall  never  get 
to  the  new  kingdom.”  Onward  went  the  traitor  after 
the  vanguard,  and  coming  up  with  it,  he  abused  both 
officers  and  men  roundly,  ordering  them  back  to  the  moun- 
tain pass  they  had  descended,  where  Aguirre  took  up 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


199 


his  quarters  for  the  night.  On  the  following  morning  he 
gave  orders  that,  during  the  march,  the  van  of  his  followers 
should  be  more  attentive  than  heretofore  to  the  progress  of 
the  rear.  The  march  commenced,  when  they  came  to  the 
valley  of  the  Damas,  so  called  by  the  first  Spaniards  who 
discovered  this  part  of  the  country.  They  descended  into 
the  valley,  and  came  upon  a large  ravine  with  a considerable 
stream  of  good  water,  called  Aracin  (which  I can  personally 
vouch  for).  Near  the  stream  a hut  was  met  with,  full  of 
maize,  which  was  most  opportune,  and  was  the  cause  of  their 
resting  a day  at  this  spot,  during  which  period  they  were  in- 
formed of  the  arrival  of  some  of  the  king’s  troops  at  Bar- 
quicimeto  through  their  spies,  who  were  posted  at  the  en- 
trance of  the  valley. 

3.  The  traitor,  seeing  that  he  was  near  the  town  in  which 
Chaves,  the  alcalde  of  Burburata,  had  informed  him  that 
the  king’s  forces  were  collecting,  began  to  have  fresh 
fears  of  some  of  his  soldiers,  and,  communicating  these 
suspicions  to  certain  of  his  well-tried  captains,  he  told  them 
of  his  determination  to  kill  all  the  suspected  soldiers,  as  well 
as  the  sick,  some  forty  in  number,  for,  with  such  an  example, 
the  remainder  would  be  true  to  him.  Some  of  the  junta  did 
not  agree  with  their  commander,  probably  inspired  from 
above.  They  said  that  if  he  did  so  his  course  would  be  less 
secure  with  the  others,  for  they  considered  if  this  occurred, 
that  in  time  their  turn  would  come  to  share  the  same  fate. 
So  Aguirre  changed  his  mind  as  to  this  sanguinary  proceed- 
ing, and  his  view  of  having  only  one  hundred  of  his  well- 
tried  friends,  as  his  companions. 

Some  days  before  this,  one  of  Aguirre’s  captains  had 
arrived  at  Barquicimeto,  and  had  entered  the  king’s  camp. 
This  was  an  officer  whom  we  have  already  mentioned,  named 
Pedro  Galeas,  who  (a  few  days  before  the  traitor  had  left  Mar- 
garita), had  been  asked  by  the  traitor  if  he  had  a flag.  Galeas 
replied  in  the  negative,  when  he  gave  him  twenty  yards  of  silk 


200 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


to  make  one.  On  another  day  (the  day  before  he  embarked), 
Aguirre  said,  “ Pedro  Alonzo,  hast  thou  a drum  ?”  when  he 
replied  that  he  only  had  the  case,  but  without  parchment. 
The  traitor  then  said  to  him,  <f  Then,  by  the  life  of  God!  be 
not  surprised  if  I make  of  thy  skin,  parchment  for  the  drum.” 
Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas  gave  the  best  answer  he  could,  and 
retired  from  the  presence  of  the  monster,  not  without  fear 
that  he  might  be  sentenced  to  death,  for  shortly  afterwards 
a friend,  as  he  passed  him,  told  him  that  he  had  been 
doomed  to  die.  Galeas  kept  well  on  the  watch,  and  at 
night  he  escaped  to  the  sea-shore,  where  he  found  Captain 
Faxardo,  who  had  just  landed,  who  as  we  have  said  came 
from  Caraccas,  with  help  for  the  island ; and  giving  him  an 
account  of  his  danger,  Faxardo  provided  him  with  a canoe 
in  which  he  went  to  Burburata,  when  he  gave  information 
respecting  the  traitor,  the  number  of  his  followers,  and  arms, 
and  the  reason  of  his  desertion  to  save  his  life.1 

About  the  time  Aguirre  was  leaving  Valencia,  Galeas  was 
coming  to  Barquicimeto,  where  he  arrived  simultaneously 
with  General  Gutierrez  de  la  Pena,  who  had  come  from 
Tocuyo  with  his  soldiers.  Pena  and  his  followers  had 
some  suspicion  that  Galeas  might  be  a spy  of  Aguirre’s,  so 
they  guarded  him  for  some  days,  until  they  were  satis- 
fied with  his  good  conduct,  and  expressions  of  sorrow  that 
he  had  ever  been  in  such  vile  company  as  that  of  Aguirre, 
of  whose  forces  and  arms  he  gave  a full  account  (which  was 
what  the  king’s  party  most  desired  to  know),  assuring  them 

1 Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas  had  been  employed  by  Ursua,  on  detached 
service,  on  two  occasions,  see  p.  26,  p.  32,  p.  35,  p.  96. 

On  deserting  Aguirre,  he  received  his  pardon,  and  continued  to  serve 
for  many  years,  under  the  governors  of  Venezuela.  In  1572  he  was 
employed  by  the  governor,  Don  Diego  de  Mazariego,  to  subdue  the 
Mariches  Indians,  who,  since  their  cacique  had  been  impaled  by  Pedro 
Ponce  de  Leon,  the  former  governor,  had  retired  into  the  woods,  and 
harrassed  the  Spaniards.  He  completely  defeated  them,  and  brought 
them  under  subjection  again. — Oviedo  y Banos. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


201 


also  that,  of  the  hundred  and  forty  men  he  had  with  him, 
only  fifty  followed  him  out  of  choice,  and  that  the  rest  only 
waited  for  the  opportunity  of  being  protected  by  the  king's 
troops,  to  abandon  the  traitor.  Galeas  also  informed  the 
royalists  of  the  best  way  to  manage  Aguirre ; not  to  attack 
him  in  a pitched  battle,  but  to  retire  before  him,  and  in  this 
manner  the  king’s  troops  would  be  in  no  danger. 

4.  All  this  gave  courage  to  Gutierrez  and  his  soldiers,  for 
they  were  somewhat  doubtful  of  success,  seeing  how  few 
their  numbers  were,  and  the  scarcity  of  arms  and  ammuni- 
tion, as  was  seen  when  the  maestro  del  campo,  Diego  Garcia 
de  Paredes,1  went  out  with  fourteen  or  fifteen  men  to  re- 
connoitre the  camp  of  the  traitor. 

All  the  troops  were  on  horseback,  but  they  had  the  most 
wretched  saddles  and  bridles ; their  only  arms  were  some 
badly  made  lances,  and  some  Burgundian  helmets,  which 

1 Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes  was  the  son  of  a very  distinguished  officer 
of  the  same  name,  a native  of  Estremadura.  When  Pizarro  returned  to 
Spain,  after  his  first  discovery  of  Peru,  young  Paredes  joined  him,  and 
was  present  at  the  landing  of  the  Spaniards  at  Tumbez,  and  at  the 
arrest  of  Atahualpa  at  Caxamarca.  Paredes  returned  to  Spain  with 
Hernando  Pizarro,  and  afterwards  fought  under  the  banner  of  Charles  Y, 
in  Italy,  Germany,  and  at  Tunis.  He  again  embarked  for  the  Indies, 
and,  having  been  some  time  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  he  finally  went  to  Vene- 
zuela, where  he  founded  the  city  of  Truxillo  ; which  he  named  after  the 
place  of  his  birth  in  Spain.  This  was  in  the  year  1556.  In  1559  Pablo 
Collado  was  appointed  governor  of  the  neighbouring  district  of  Tocuyo  ; 
while  Paredes  continued  to  govern  Truxillo,  until,  in  1561,  the  Royal 
Audience  of  Bogota  received  tidings  of  the  unheard  of  cruelties  of  Lope 
de  Aguirre.  Paredes  lost  no  time  in  mustering  his  forces  and  marched 
to  Merida,  to  assist  the  governor  Collado,  who  appointed  him  maestro 
del  campo,  and  where,  as  Simon  relates,  he  took  a leading  part  in  de- 
stroying the  traitor.  He  then  sailed  for  Spain,  with  some  of  the  banners 
of  Aguirre,  which  he  placed  over  the  tomb  of  his  father.  These  banners 
had  the  blood-red  swords  worked  crosswrays  upon  them.  As  a reward  for 
these  services  Paredes  received  the  government  of  Popayan,  and  once 
more  sailed  for  the  Indies  in  1563.  He  landed  on  the  coast  of  Vene- 
zuela, with  a small  party,  where  he  was  killed  by  the  Indians,  who  fired 
arrows  upon  his  followers,  from  an  ambuscade. — Pizarro' s Varones  Illus - 
tres  del  Nuevo  Mundo , p.  399. 


D D 


202 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


were  merely  dirty  old  hoods,  made  out  of  pieces  of  cloth 
of  various  colours,  with  two  or  three  linings  of  cotton  cloth ; 
and  the  sight  of  such  helmets  provoked  a smile,  rather  than 
confidence  as  to  their  utility  for  defence. 

The  general  remained  in  Barquicimeto  (whilst  Paredes 
went  out  to  look  after  the  enemy)  with  the  rest  of  the  king’s 
troops,  some  seventy  in  number,  armed  in  about  the  same 
unsatisfactory  manner  as  the  party  of  Paredes.  The  general 
had  only  two  arquebuses,  one  of  them  having  no  lock,  and 
very  little  powder ; neither  could  it  be  said  that  they  were 
good  horsemen,  indeed  only  the  captains  had  any  pretensions 
to  the  art ; as  to  the  men,  when  mounted,  they  looked  more 
like  baggage  than  caballeros.  Having  made  these  warlike 
preparations  the  general,  Pefia,  remained  behind,  not  over 
comfortable,  anxiously  hoping  for  the  success  of  the  maestro 
del  campo. 


CHAP.  XLVI. 

1.  The  maestro  del  campo , in  a narrow  part  of  the  road , unexpectedly 
finds  himself  in  Aguirre's  camp.  Both  parties  retire. — 2.  The  general 
Pena  takes  letters  of  pardon  from  the  governor,  for  Aguirre  and  his 
soldiers. — 3.  The  king's  party  determine  to  await  Aguirre's  attack 
upon  the  town.  Aguirre  writes  a letter  of  promises  and  threats. — 4. 
The  traitor's  party  shov ? themselves  to  those  in  the  town,  hut  no  action 
ensues. 

1.  Paredes  was  on  the  march  with  his  people  towards  the 
enemy,  and  Aguirre  with  his  against  the  royalists,  on  the  day 
he  left  the  Aracin  valley,  the  former  entering  the  lower  part 
of  the  valley  of  the  Damas,  the  latter  descending  from  the 
upper.  Their  track  lay  through  thick  forests,  most  difficult 
to  march  through,  and  by  such  a narrow  path  that  one  tra- 
veller had  to  follow  behind  another,  and  horsemen  scarcely 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


203 


had  room  to  turn  their  horses.  On  such  a road  both  parties 
were  coming  in  opposite  directions,  without  having  an  idea 
of  each  other’s  position,  when  suddenly  they  came  in  sight. 
They  were  so  astounded  at  thus  seeing  each  other,  that  the 
only  determination  they  came  to  was  mutually  to  retreat. 
Those  who  came  with  the  maestro  del  campo  (as  they 
were  mounted,  the  road  very  narrow,  and  their  confusion 
considerable),  whilst  turning  their  horses,  had  some  of 
their  Morisco  lances,  and  some  of  their  Burgundian 
helmets,  knocked  off  by  the  branches  of  the  trees;  and, 
as  it  appeared  to  them  that  there  was  no  time  to  col- 
lect their  fallen  lances  and  helmets,  they  were  left  by 
the  retreating  soldiers.  No  less  were  the  difficulties  of 
the  Maranones ; they  did  not  march  armed,  neither  were 
the  matches  of  their  arquebuses  lighted ; they,  however, 
lighted  them  at  once,  and  commenced  their  march  in  the  best 
way  they  could,  suffering  much  from  the  obstacles  of  the  road, 
until  nightfall,  when  they  encamped  near  a rivulet.  They 
examined  the  arms  and  helmets  that  had  been  dropped  by 
the  soldiers  of  the  maestro  del  campo,  and  jeering  at  one 
and  the  other,  the  traitor  said  to  his  people  : “ Do  ye  not 
perceive,  Maranones,  where  fortune  has  brought  ye,  and 
where  ye  wish  to  fly  to  and  remain  ? Look  at  these  helmets, 
brought  by  the  galleons  of  Meliona ! see  how  rich  these 
vassals  of  the  king  of  Castille  are  !”  In  this  and  a thousand 
similar  ridiculous  observations,  in  regard  to  the  helmets, 
they  amused  themselves  until  two  or  three  in  the  morning, 
when  the  moon  rose,  and  they  continued  their  march, 
Aguirre  taking  care  secretly  to  place  guards  near  to  those 
he  suspected,  so  that  they  might  not  desert. 

2.  The  maestro  del  campo  did  not  draw  rein  until  he  ar- 
rived at  some  savannas  or  open  land  outside  the  forest, 
where  he  proposed  to  form  ambuscades,  and  rout  the 
tyrant ; but  this  plan  did  not  take  effect,  for  the  Maranones, 
who  were  marching  by  the  light  of  the  moon,  came  upon 
the  royalists,  who  decamped  in  haste  from  before  Aguirre. 


204 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


The  maestro  del  campo,  having  twice  been  too  near  his 
enemy,  returned  with  all  speed  to  the  city  of  Barquicimeto, 
from  whence  he  advised  the  governor,  who  was  still  at 
Tocuyo,  as  to  the  state  of  affairs. 

The  military  portion  of  the  community  held  council 
how  best  to  defend  the  place,  and  oppose  the  tyrant.  They 
considered  that  they  were  not  very  safe  within  the  city, 
inasmuch  as  they  were  on  horseback,  and  had  no  arque- 
buses ; while  the  traitors  were  on  foot  and  had  firearms, 
and  if  they  took  possession  of  any  of  the  houses  (as  it 
was  most  probable),  they  could  defend  themselves  and 
annoy  the  royalists  and  their  horses  at  pleasure.  The 
general  Pena  had  many  letters  of  pardon  with  him  (for  as 
the  licenciate  Gasca  had  done  in  Piru,  when  he  went  against 
Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  his  followers,  so  had  the  governor 
Pablo  Collado  written  these  documents,  and  signed  them  in 
the  king’s  name),  which  promised  to  all  those  of  Aguirre’s 
men,  who  would  leave  him  and  come  over  to  the  king’s 
side,  before  they  encountered  each  other  in  battle,  full  par- 
don for  all  the  crimes  which  they  had  committed  in  this  re- 
bellion, promising  them  their  lives  in  his  royal  name.  With 
these  there  was  a still  stronger  pardon  for  Aguirre,  with  a 
letter  in  which  he  was  exhorted  to  abandon  this  rebellion, 
and  join  the  king’s  forces,  promising  him  that  the  governor 
would  take  no  notice  of  what  had  occurred,  but  rather 
that  he  would  place  these  matters  at  the  pious  feet  of  his 
majesty,  with  his  strong  recommendation  that  all  should  be 
confirmed  that  he  promised  in  his  royal  name  to  him  and  his 
soldiers  ; but  if  he  still  persisted  in  continuing  his  present 
state  of  life,  to  save  the  lives  of  so  many  who  must  fall 
in  battle,  Collado  proposed  that  Aguirre  should  meet  him, 
and  settle  the  question  in  single  combat. 

3.  The  king’s  party,  having  arranged  to  leave  the  city  to 
Aguirre,  distributed  the  letters  of  pardon  in  the  houses,  so 
that  when  the  Marahones  came  in,  they  might  easily  find 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


205 


them.  Having  done  this,  they  took  with  them  all  the 
provisions,  so  that  the  traitor  might  find  none  there ; 
and  then  they  all  separated,  retiring  to  the  heights  of 
the  open  country,  and  having  marched  half  a league, 
they  encamped  that  night  by  the  side  of  a stream,  whilst 
Aguirre  was  journeying  that  same  night  towards  Bar- 
quicimeto,  arriving  at  noon  within  a league  and  a half,  and 
also  halting  by  a stream.  Here  he  loaded  his  guns  and 
pointed  them  in  the  direction  of  the  road  that  came  down 
from  the  town,  placing  his  band  so  as  to  be  in  readi- 
ness for  any  emergency.  The  traitor  now  determined  to 
send  a letter  to  the  town,  by  an  Indian  Yanacona,  one  of 
those  he  had  brought  with  him  from  Piru.  In  this  letter  he 
told  the  people  of  the  town  not  to  leave  the  place,  for  that 
it  was  not  his  intention  to  do  them  any  harm ; that  he 
required  some  provisions  and  horses,  which  he  would 
pay  well  for,  and  if  any  soldiers  or  others  wished  to  ac- 
company him  to  Piru,  he  would  allow  them  to  do  so, 
promising  such  persons  most  honourable  treatment,  and 
that  when  they  got  to  Piru  they  should  have  a pleasant  life 
of  it ; but,  on  the  contrary,  if  they  fled  from  the  town,  he 
gave  them  his  oath  that  he  would  burn  it  to  ashes,  destroy 
their  cattle  and  plantations,  and  tear  to  pieces  all  the  inha- 
bitants that  fell  into  his  hands,  and  do  his  utmost  to  prevent 
any  from  escaping. 

The  royalists  received  this  letter,  and,  taking  due  note  of 
its  extravagances,  did  not  give  themselves  much  trouble  in 
replying  to  it,  for  they  were  well  aware  of  the  sort  of  friend- 
ship they  had  to  expect  from  the  traitor. 

Aguirre  rested  that  half  day,  and  the  following  night ; 
and  the  next  day,  Wednesday,  the  22nd  of  October,  in  the 
year  1561,  he  put  his  forces  in  order  of  march,  including 
his  artillery,  at  the  same  time  issuing  an  order,  that  if  any 
soldiers  went  three  paces  out  of  the  line  of  march,  those  who 
might  be  nearest  to  such  an  offender,  were  to  kill  him  with 
their  arquebuses,  or  in  any  other  convenient  manner. 


206 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


Gutierrez  de  la  Pena  had  not  been  unmindful  on  his  side 
during  the  night,  and  the  same  Wednesday,  at  daylight, 
he,  with  all  his  soldiers  on  horseback  (a  little  more  than 
eighty  in  number),  placed  themselves  on  the  heights 
just  within  firing  distance  of  the  arquebuses  of  the  town, 
and  west  of  it,  from  whence  Pena  could  see  Aguirre’s  camp, 
and  that  he  was  advancing  rapidly,  with  the  royalist 
force  in  sight.  Aguirre  now  halted  at  the  bottom  of  the 
ravine,  and  near  to  the  first  houses  of  the  town,  marshal- 
ling his  people  afresh.  He  placed  his  best  friends  well 
armed,  in  front,  refreshing  their  memories  as  to  what 
orders  he  had  given  them ; in  the  rear  were  placed  the  bag- 
gage and  servants,  with  the  rest  of  his  soldiers,  and  the 
march  to  the  town  was  resumed.  In  the  meanwhile  the 
king’s  troops  commenced  descending  to  the  houses,  when 
Aguirre  saluted,  by  firing  his  heavily  loaded  arquebuses 
with  powder  only,  so  as  to  make  more  noise,  in  the  hope  of 
striking  terror  into  his  enemy.  He  then  ordered  the  fire- 
arms to  be  double  shotted,  and  unfurling  four  flags  and  two 
standards,  he  continued  his  march,  entering  the  town  on 
one  side,  whilst  the  royalists  did  the  same  at  the  other ; but 
as  the  town  was  small,  they  soon  came  near  to  each  other. 

The  king’s  party  had  their  doubts  as  to  the  prudence  of 
attacking  the  traitor,  and  resolved,  as  they  were  so  badly 
supplied  with  arms,  in  comparison  with  what  Aguirre  had, 
to  retreat  again  to  the  heights,  so  there  was  no  fighting ; 
moreover,  this  would  give  time  for  those  of  the  tyrant’s 
followers  who  wished  to  leave  him,  to  join  the  king’s  troops, 
for  if  they  had  come  to  a fight  in  the  town,  there  was  not  a 
soldier  under  the  traitor’s  banner  who  would  not  have  sold 
his  life  dearly,  as  yet  not  knowing  of  the  promised  pardon. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


207 


CHAP.  XLYII. 

1.  Garcia  de  Paredes  lays  hands  on  some  clothes  and  ammunition  be- 
longing to  the  traitor.  His  soldiers  find  the  letters  of  pardon. — 
2.  Aguirre  talks  to  them  on  this  subject , they  decide  on  following  him. 
— 3.  Aguirre  sets  fire  to  the  town.  The  maestro  del  campo  fires  into 
the  enemy's  camp.  This  vexes  Aguirre. — 4.  Pedro  Bravo  de  Molina 
arrives  with  men  from  Merida , where  the  governor  had  made  him  his 
lieutenant-general. 

1.  Whilst  the  king’s  troops  were  retiring  to  the  heights, 
the  maestro  del  campo,  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes,  with 
eight  companions  on  horseback,  separated  from  the  main 
body,  and,  unobserved  by  Aguirre’s  men,  fell  upon  the 
traitor’s  rear,  which  had  not  as  yet  reached  the  town,  taking 
four  horses  laden  with  clothes,  powder,  and  other  things, 
which  were  much  needed  by  the  royalists,  as  they  were 
unprovided  with  them,  and  had  not  even  powder  for  their 
few  arquebuses. 

Aguirre  took  up  his  quarters,  with  all  his  people,  in  a 
large  square  place,  in  the  highest  part  of  the  town,  sur- 
rounded by  high  mud  walls  with  turrets,  where  the  houses 
of  a captain  named  Damian  del  Barrio  stood.  Here  the 
traitor  was  somewhat  protected  from  his  adversaries,  and 
felt  more  secure  of  many  of  his  followers,  of  whom  he  had 
suspicion  that  they  would  desert. 

The  king’s  party  could  see  their  opponents  from  the 
heights,  where  they  were  encamped,  anxiously  waiting  to 
see  if  any  of  Aguirre’s  men,  who  had  found  the  letters  of 
pardon,  would  desert  him ; but  as  he  had  shut  them  up  in  a 
guarded  position,  none  of  them  could  leave  their  quarters. 

As  night  approached,  the  general  left  a troop  of  twelve  of 
his  best  horsemen  on  the  heights,  and  returned  to  his  camp. 
Aguirre  perceived  that  his  enemy  had  moved,  and,  as  his 
men  were  very  anxious  indeed  to  rob  the  houses,  thinking 
they  would  find  good  pillage,  he  gave  them  leave  to  go  to 
the  houses,  and  strip  them  of  all  they  could  find. 


208 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


However,  as  we  have  said,  the  inhabitants  had  removed 
all  their  property.  They  only  found  the  letters  of  pardon 
for  them,  as  well  as  one  for  Aguirre,  accompanied  by  a 
letter,  the  reading  of  which  rather  disturbed  him.  He  said 
to  his  soldiers  : “ I know,  Senores,  that  you  have  found  other 
letters  of  pardon  written  by  the  governor,  in  which  induce- 
ments are  held  out  for  you  to  join  him,  promising  pardon 
for  all  the  wickedness  you  have  committed  up  to  the  present 
time,  and,  as  I am  an  experienced  man  in  such  things,  and 
I wish  you  and  myself  well,  I shall  undeceive  you  : so  put  no 
trust  in  governors,  nor  in  their  papers  or  signatures ; think 
on  the  cruelties,  robberies,  deaths,  and  destruction  of  towns 
you  have  committed,  you  may  be  well  assured  that,  as  to  the 
atrocities  you  have  committed  ; neither  in  Spain,  the  Indies, 
nor  any  other  part  of  the  world,  have  there  been  such  men  as 
you  are,  who  have  done  such  horrors;  and  I tell  you,  although 
the  king  in  person  wished  to  pardon  you,  I do  not  believe  he 
would  be  allowed  to  do  so,  much  less  a licenciate  such  as  Pablo 
Collado,  for  the  relations  and  friends  of  those  you  have  slain 
would  hunt  you  to  the  death  and  kill  you,  for  you  will  be  always 
exposed  to  be  murdered,  you  will  be  insulted  and  hunted 
like  wild  beasts,  and  called  traitors.  Just  see  what  was  the 
fate  of  Piedrahita,  of  Tomas  Vasquez,  and  of  other  captains,  in 
regard  to  the  king’s  pardon,  when,  having  served  the  crown 
of  Castille  the  whole  of  their  lives,  there  came  a talkative 
little  lawyer  of  no  account,  who  cut  their  heads  off  ;l  then 
what  would  happen  to  us,  who  have  committed  more  mur- 
ders and  desperate  actions  in  one  day,  than  all  those  who 
have  rebelled  in  the  Indies  against  the  king  ? Let  each  of 
you  think  well  on  this  ; be  not  too  easy  of  belief ; do 
nothing  in  a hurry  so  as  to  repent  afterwards ; and,  as  I have 
often  said,  nowhere  are  you  so  safe  as  in  my  company.  As 
to  having  anything  to  do  with  these  papers  of  the  governor, 
they  are  bitter  fruit  and  gilded  pills,  so  that  under  a delu- 
1 Alluding  to  the  executions  of  the  marquis  of  Canete,  in  Peru. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


209 


sive  colour  you  would  swallow  poison.  Let  us  reflect : if  we 
at  present  have  hunger  and  troubles,  the  future  has  rest  in 
store  for  us ; if  we  have  some  difficulties  before  we  get  to 
Piru,  there  we  shall  find  abundance  and  happiness.”  Con- 
cluding, as  he  generally  did  when  speaking  on  important 
occasions,  then  let  us  sell  our  lives  dearly,  and  do  our 
duty.” 

S.  Nevertheless  each  man  apparently  had  his  own  parti- 
cular view  of  the  position  of  affairs.  Aguirre,  thinking  that 
the  houses  of  the  town  might  give  cover  to  the  enemy, 
ordered  them  to  be  set  on  fire,  only  leaving  a few,  for 
the  use  of  his  arquebusiers.  As  the  houses  were  of  straw, 
some  of  the  sparks  set  fire  to  the  church,  which  was 
built  of  the  same  materials  as  the  houses  ; it  is,  however, 
said  that  the  church  was  set  on  fire  by  a soldier  named 
Francisco  de  Guerra ; but  when  Aguirre  saw  the  church  in 
flames  (to  give  an  idea  that  he  had  some  Christian  feelings), 
he  immediately  ordered  that  some  ornaments  and  images 
of  saints,  which  were  on  the  altar,  should  be  saved. 

The  king’s  troops,  being  aware  of  the  reason  why  certain 
houses  had  been  preserved,  set  fire  to  them  when  it  was 
night,  so  that  the  only  one  remaining  was  that  in  which 
the  traitor  had  his  quarters. 

During  the  night  both  camps  were  watchful  of  each  other, 
but  at  daybreak  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes,  with  some  friends 
on  horseback,  and  five  arquebuses,  which  was  the  whole  of 
the  artillery  even  now  in  the  king’s  camp  (they  had  had 
only  two  at  first,  but  were  reinforced  by  three  more), 
approached  Aguirre’s  entrenchment,  fired  the  arms,  and 
made  other  disturbances,  so  as  to  disquiet  the  traitor  and 
cause  confusion.  Aguirre  ordered  his  men  under  arms, 
but  it  being  still  dark,  it  was  some  time  before  they  could 
distinguish  one  another.  He  then  ordered  forty  of  his 
arquebusiers  to  sally  out  silently,  and  attack  the  maestro  del 
campo.  When  they  were  within  firing  distance,  they  dis- 


210 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


charged  their  pieces,  but  without  effect;  neither  did  this 
operation  cause  any  disturbance  to  those  in  the  king’s  camp, 
who,  without  discomposing  themselves,  were  well  on  their 
guard. 

Each  party  retired  to  his  camp ; and  it  would  appear  as 
if  God  was  so  arranging  these  matters,  that  the  traitor 
should  be  conquered,  without  more  blood  being  spilt  on 
either  side,  for  enough  had  been  already  shed. 

4.  The  governor,  Pablo  Collado  (in  consequence  of  indis- 
position caused  by  his  apprehension  as  to  the  success  of 
the  king’s  arms),  retired  to  Tocuyo,  until  captain  Pedro 
Bravo  de  Molina,  with  his  people,  came  from  Merida,  which 
was  on  the  same  day  that  Aguirre  entered  Barquicimeto.  The 
governor  had  no  intention  of  being  present  at  any  encounters 
with  the  traitor,  notwithstanding  the  letter  he  had  written  to 
him  (as  some  understood  and  published),  advising  him  to  come 
and  cure  himself  of  his  malady  in  this  New  Kingdom,  for  that 
it  was  especially  adapted  for  the  improvement  of  his  health ; 
under  the  supposition  that  he  might  overthrow  the  traitor. 
Captain  Pedro  Bravo,  perceiving  the  coldness  of  the  gover- 
nor, essayed  to  persuade  him  how  important  it  was  that  he 
should  be  present  in  the  king’s  camp,  as  representing  his 
royal  person,  which  would  animate  the  soldiers  to  comply 
with  their  obligations,  and  in  the  hope  that  he  would  repay 
their  exertions,  and  report  to  the  king  their  conduct  in  his 
service,  having  seen  with  his  own  eyes  what  they  had 
done  ; moreover,  it  would  tarnish  his  honour  if  he  did 
not  go. 

At  first  the  governor  made  some  excuses,  referring  to  his 
peculiar  attacks  of  illness,  which  had  prevented  him  hereto- 
fore from  joining  the  royal  standard ; but,  as  it  was  the 
desire  of  captain  Bravo,  he  said  he  would  make  the  effort  to 
be  found  in  the  king’s  camp  ; the  more  particularly  with  the 
succours  Bravo  had  brought  with  him,  for  which  he  was 
very  grateful  to  the  captain,  and,  seeing  that  he  was  a good 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


211 


and  proper  man,  he  named  Bravo  as  his  lieutenant-general, 
not  only  for  this  expedition,  hut  for  the  district  he  was 
governor  of,  and  he  also  gave  him  his  commission  as  captain 
of  the  cavalry. 


CHAP.  XLYIII. 

1.  Bravo  accepts  the  posts  conferred  on  him  by  the  governor ; they  all 
leave  Tocuyo  for  the  king's  camp. — 2.  Aguirre's  letter  to  the  gover- 
nor, Pablo  Collado. — 3.  Those  from  Tocuyo  join  the  king's  forces , 
when  victory  over  the  traitor  is  anticipated. — 4.  Two  of  Aguirre's 
soldiers  desert  to  the  king's  side.  The  maestro  del  campo  and  captain 
Bravo  catch  some  Indians  belonging  to  the  Maranones. 

1.  At  first  the  soldiers  of  Merida  did  not  think  that  their 
captain  ought  to  have  accepted  the  offices  he  did,  and  that 
he  ought  not  to  march  under  the  governor’s  banner,  but 
rather  go  independently,  as  he  came  from  another  district, 
under  his  own  flag,  and  with  his  own  followers,  to  do  what 
lay  in  his  power,  or  even  to  show  prodigies  of  valour. 

But  Pedro  Bravo,  by  accepting  the  several  important 
offices,  considered  he  was  acting  in  accordance  with  the  rules 
of  honour,  as  well  as  for  the  benefit  of  himself  and  his  men, 
and,  in  truth,  he  served  his  king  right  well  in  all  he  did. 

The  governor,  still  considering  that  he  had  not  conferred 
sufficient  honours  on  Bravo,  offered  likewise  to  assist  his 
soldiers  and  followers  in  anything  they  required.  Some  of 
the  soldiers,  in  order  to  find  out  to  what  point  the  gover- 
nor’s liberality  extended,  rather  than  that  they  required  it, 
said,  although  they  had  come  most  willingly  to  serve  the 
king  at  their  own  expense,  and  what  they  required  they 
were  willing  to  pay  for,  they  would,  however,  accept  from 
his  generous  hands  what  they  were  much  in  want  of,  namely, 
shoes  for  their  horses.  The  governor  sent  orders  to  a mer- 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


212 

chant  to  give  each  soldier,  on  his  account,  a dozen  horseshoes, 
with  corresponding  nails  ; he,  however,  gave  instructions 
that  they  were  only  to  have  the  horseshoes  and  nothing 
else ; and  with  this  present  he  considered  they  were  abun- 
dantly provided,  and  at  little  cost.  Bravo’s  soldiers  thanked 
the  governor  for  his  offer,  but,  as  it  really  was  not  their  wish 
to  accept  anything,  the  governor’s  offer  of  the  horseshoes 
amused  them. 

The  governor,  Pedro  Bravo  and  his  men  of  Merida,  and 
those  who  had  joined  him  on  the  road, in  the  city  of  New  Tru- 
jillo, (in  all  some  seventy  men),  marched  out  of  Tocuyo  late  in 
the  day  to  join  the  king’s  forces  ; and,  having  journeyed  all 
the  night  (it  being  very  hot  during  the  day),  at  daybreak 
they  met  a messenger,  the  bearer  of  a letter  to  the  governor, 
from  Lope  de  Aguirre.  The  governor  made  a halt  to  read 
the  letter,  which  he  did  to  all  his  party. 

2.  “Most  magnificent  Senor. — Amongst  other  papers  from 
you,  found  in  this  town,  was  a letter  of  yours  directed  to  me, 
with  more  promises  and  preambles  than  there  are  stars  in 
heaven,  and,  as  regards  myself  and  my  companions,  it  was 
unnecessary  for  you  to  have  taken  such  trouble,  for  I well 
know  to  what  point  your  power  extends,  and  how  far  you 
are  able  to  oblige  me,  in  your  recommendations  to  the  king. 
Most  superfluous  are  your  offers,  as  I know  well  that  your 
position  and  power  are  but  of  poor  account ; and,  if  the  king 
of  Spain  had  to  pass  through  the  conflict  there  is  to  be  between 
us  both,  I would  not  accept  them  ; moreover,  I will  give  you 
every  advantage  in  arms  ; but  to  me  all  you  say  is  a mere 
artifice,  and  such  as  has  often  been  resorted  to  against  those 
brave  men  who  conquered  and  settled  this  country.  And 
you  have  come  to  rob  them  of  the  fruit  of  their  hard-earned 
labour,  saying  that  you  come  to  do  them  justice,  and  the 
justice  you  offer  them  is  to  inquire  how  and  in  what  manner 
they  conquered  the  country,  and  for  this  you  come  to  make 
war  on  them.  The  favour  I ask  of  you  is,  that  you  do  not 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


213 


force  us  to  come  to  blows ; if  we  do,  your  gaius  will  be 
few,  for  my  companions  make  but  light  of  your  promise  of 
pardon,  and  are  prepared  to  sell  their  lives  dearly.  I have 
nothing  to  do  with  affairs  in  this  part  of  the  country;  I wish 
to  pay  well  with  my  own  money,  for  the  cost  of  some 
horses  and  other  things ; by  this  course  you  will  pre- 
serve your  district  from  the  horrors  of  war.  From  what 
we  have  already  seen  of  the  things  of  this  land,  we  will 
put  wings  on,  and  use  our  spurs  well,  not  to  be  detained 
here ; we  have  seen  some  of  your  hoods  of  helmets,  or 
rather  hats,  and  playthings  of  lances,  thrown  away  by 
your  soldiers  in  their  hurry  to  escape  from  us.  These  things 
tell  us  what  your  forces  are  composed  of.  I return  to  the 
letter  ; it  is  of  little  use  your  saying  that  we  were  not  acting 
as  if  we  were  in  the  king’s  service,  I and  my  companions 
are  only  doing  what  our  predecessors  did,  which  is  not 
against  the  king ; for  we  hold  him  who  commands  us  as 
our  lord,  and  no  other.  It  is  a long  time  since  we  di- 
vested ourselves  of  our  rights  as  Spaniards,  and  we  refuse 
fealty  to  the  king.  We  have  made  a new  king  whom  we 
obey,  and,  as  vassals  of  another  lord,  we  may  well  make  war 
against  those  we  have  sworn  to  fight,  which  is  our  business 
and  not  yours.  And  in  conclusion  I say,  that  according 
to  the  sort  of  behaviour  you  and  yours  adopt  in  our 
vicinity,  so  will  we  treat  you.  If  you  search  us  out  you  will 
find  us  ready  for  you,  and  the  sooner  you  supply  us  with 
what  we  require,  the  sooner  will  we  leave  this  land.  I do 
not  offer  you  my  services,  because  you  would  hold  them 
valueless.  Our  Lord  preserve  the  most  magnificent  person 
of  your  worship,  etc.  Your  servant, 

“ Lope  de  Aguirre.” 

3.  The  governor,  having  read  this  letter  to  his  followers, 
said,  Cf  Would  to  God  that  the  result  of  this  war  might  be 
settled  personally  between  me  and  Aguirre ; for  although 
he  makes  himself  out  so  powerful,  it  might  happen  that  I 


214 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


should  punish  him  as  he  intimates  he  could  do  with  me ; 
but,  as  God  has  so  ordained  it,  let  us  give  him  thanks 
for  all  his  mercies ; our  sins  are  the  cause  of  so  many 
evils,  that  even  to  this  great  distance  have  reached  the 
sparks  of  the  rebellions  in  Piru,  that  make  us  so  unhappy, 
and  put  us  into  such  straits.”  This  was  said  amidst  such 
showers  of  tears  and  demonstrations  of  fear,  as  to  cause  the 
people  to  murmur,  which  continued  so  many  days  that  it 
must  have  come  to  the  ears  of  the  governor. 

The  governor  and  his  party  continued  their  march,  and 
arrived  at  the  general’s  camp  at  midday,  where  they  were 
received  with  every  expression  of  joy  by  the  soldiers  of  the 
camp,  who  were  restored  to  new  life  by  this  timely  addi- 
tion to  their  numbers,  and  any  doubts  they  may  have  had 
previously  as  to  victory  over  the  traitor  were  now  converted 
into  certainty  ; particularly  in  regard  to  the  stratagem  played 
off  by  Bravo,  to  give  courage  to  the  king’s  people,  as  well 
as  to  intimidate  their  enemies,  for  he  reported  that  in  Merida 
there  was  an  oidor  from  the  Audencia  of  Santa  Fe,  with 
five  hundred  armed  men.  Bravo  himself  had  brought  only 
two  hundred  men,  which  number  appeared  to  him  sufficient 
to  counteract  the  intentions  of  the  traitor. 

This  favourable  newTs  soon  spread  through  the  camp,  and 
at  nightfall  a negro  slave  deserted  to  Aguirre,  informing  him 
of  the  arrival  of  Bravo,  with  a force  of  two  hundred  men, 
well  mounted  and  armed. 

The  traitor  heard  this  without  shewing  any  particular 
signs  of  astonishment ; but  his  soldiers  became  uneasy,  and 
concluded,  if  this  was  true,  that  they  must  be  now  routed 
by  the  royalists  ; so  several  proposed  to  themselves  to  watch 
for  an  opportunity,  desert  to  the  king’s  camp,  and  so  take 
advantage  of  the  governor’s  pardon. 

4.  Although  Aguirre  had  kept  strict  watch  upon  his  men 
up  to  this  period,  he  now  increased  his  vigilance,  and 
would  not  let  them  out  of  his  entrenchment ; this  pre- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


215 


vented  those  who  wished  to  escape,  from  doing  so.  But  God 
prepared  an  opening  for  them  to  go  over  to  the  king’s  peo- 
ple ; two  of  Aguirre’s  men,  named  Rengel  and  Francisco 
Guerrero,  on  the  third  day  of  their  arrival,  which  was  on  a 
Wednesday,  managed  to  get  secretly  out  of  the  entrench- 
ment to  the  king’s  camp,  where  they  were  well  received,  as 
it  was  of  great  importance  to  the  royalists  to  know  that  there 
were  very  many  in  the  enemy’s  camp  only  awaiting  an  op- 
portunity to  desert,  which  they  could  easily  do.  They  said, 
that  all  the  king’s  people  had  to  do,  to  conquer  the  tyrant,  was 
to,  as  it  were,  besiege  Aguirre,  and  see  that  he  did  not  obtain 
supplies  of  provisions,  of  which  he  was  much  in  want,  re- 
peating that  his  men  were  most  anxious  to  leave  him,  par- 
ticularly captain  Juan  Geronymo  de  Espindola,  Hernando 
Centemo,  and  ten  or  twelve  of  their  comrades. 

With  this  fresh  information,  and  with  what  they  had 
received  through  Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas,  the  king’s  party 
felt  they  could  well  assail  the  tyrant,  and  that,  being  in  sight 
of  him,  they  could  prevent  him  from  sallying  forth  in  search 
of  provisions,  unless  the  whole  of  the  traitors  came  out 
together. 

On  the  same  day  the  maestro  del  campo,  the  captain  Bravo, 
and  forty  soldiers,  including  Rengel  and  Guerrero,  went  to 
within  talking  distance  of  Aguirre,  when  they  commenced 
calling  to  the  traitor’s  men  to  come  out  and  join  them,  telling 
them  not  to  dream  of  being  victorious,  as  captain  Bravo, 
writh  two  hundred  men,  well  mounted  and  armed,  was  there 
from  Merida ; that  if  they  resisted  he  would  cut  all  their 
throats  ; that  they  should  come  out  at  once,  take  advantage 
of  the  pardon,  and  thus  save  their  lives.  Whilst  the  king’s 
people  were  thus  talking  to  those  of  the  traitor,  they  ob- 
served some  male  and  female  Indians,  who  were  in  the 
service  of  the  Maranones,  washing  clothes  in  a ravine  not 
far  from  Aguirre’s  position,  so,  leaving  a number  where 
they  were,  the  maestro  del  campo  and  captain  Bravo 


216 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


descended  to  the  ravine  with  the  rest,  laid  hands  upon  the 
Indians,  and  took  them  up  behind  them  on  their  horses, 
all  with  the  clothes  they  were  washing. 


CHAP.  XLIX. 

] . Aguirre  sends  sixty  arquebusiers  to  fire  into  the  king's  camp  at  night , 
but  without  any  result. — 2.  The  traitor  comes  out  to  the  aid  of  his 
men , and  prepares  to  resist  the  royalists. — 3.  Aguirre' s fire  makes  no 
impression  on  the  royalists.  Captain  Diego  Tirado  deserts  from  the 
traitor. — 4.  Another  soldier  tries  to  desert  to  the  royalists.  A mounted 
soldier  of  the  king's  party  makes  the  circuit  of  Aguirre's  entrench- 
ment. 

1.  The  traitor  was  beginning  to  have  some  fears  of  his 
ultimate  success,  seeing  that  his  men  were  deserting  him, 
that  the  king’s  men  showed  so  bold  a front,  and  even  came 
up  to  the  walls  of  his  quarters,  and  that  his  Indian  servants 
were  taken  from  him.  With  the  concurrence  of  those  he 
considered  as  his  best  friends,  he  resolved  that  sixty  of  them 
should  sally  forth  in  search  of  provisions  that  night,  and  fire 
into  the  king’s  camp,  in  the  hope  of  doing  them  harm,  and  that 
about  daybreak  they  should  be  retiring,  for  at  that  hour  he 
would  come  out  with  the  rest  of  his  people  to  their  help. 

He  gave  the  command  of  this  expedition  to  Poberto  de 
Susaya,  the  captain  of  his  guard,  and  to  Christobal  Garcia, 
captain  of  infantry.  They  commenced  their  foray  in  the 
direction  of  the  king’s  camp,  when,  after  a time,  they  passed 
near  to  the  captain  Pomero  (who  had  settled  Villa  Pica, 
which  he  afterwards  removed  to  another  spot),  who,  with 
some  companions,  were  coming  from  his  town  to  help  the 
king’s  party.  Pomero,  in  the  stillness  of  the  night,  heard 
the  trooping  sounds  of  the  sixty  Maranones,  and,  putting 
spurs  to  his  horse,  he  and  his  followers  lost  no  time  in  gallop- 
ing to  the  king’s  camp,  and  giving  the  alarm ; however  it  is 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


217 


said  by  some,  that  what  Romero  heard  was  not  a noise  caused 
by  the  Maranones,  as  they  were  far  from  the  road  he  travelled 
on,  but  that  it  was  caused  by  some  wild  mares  and  foals, 
which,  scenting  the  horses  of  Romero’s  party,  began  to 
run  about.  As  the  whole  country  was  up  in  arms,  Romero 
might  easily  believe  he  had  heard  the  footsteps  of  the 
enemy.  The  report  had  the  effect  of  causing  a goodly  party, 
from  the  king’s  camp,  to  saddle  at  once  and  go  forth,  but 
they  found  no  enemy,  and  returned  to  camp. 

The  sixty  Marahones  (who  afterwards  said  they  had  heard 
no  one  during  the  night,  neither  had  they  come  up  with  the 
king’s  camp)  laid  themselves  down  to  sleep,  and,  at  day- 
break, they  were  perceived  by  the  royalist  sentinels,  who 
gave  immediate  alarm  to  their  camp,  when  they  all  armed 
and  went  out  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy. 

2.  The  Marahones,  perceiving  this  movement  of  the 
king’s  party,  began  to  retire  to  their  camp,  and  sent  a 
soldier  to  Aguirre  to  advise  him  of  their  position,  but,  coming 
upon  a portion  of  thick  wood  sufficient  to  protect  their 
rear,  whilst  in  front  there  were  some  ravines,  they  formed, 
and  faced  the  royalists,  who  could  not  get  near  them  with 
their  horses,  and  so  they  stood  looking  at  each  other,  until 
Lope  de  Aguirre  with  a troop  came  to  the  assistance  of  his 
men.  The  traitor  was  mounted  on  a jet  black  steed ; the 
flag  of  his  guard  floated  in  the  breeze  (which  was  made  of 
black  silk,  ornamented  with  two  blood-red  swords).  Having 
joined  company  with  the  sixty  arquebusiers,  he  made  a 
movement  as  if  he  was  coming  from  his  cover  to  attack  the 
royalists,  who  were  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  in  number, 
all  on  horseback,  for  they  had  received  people  from  Valen- 
cia, Coro,  and  the  Burburata ; still  there  were  only  five  or 
six  arquebuses  amongst  them  all. 

The  royalists  saw  that,  as  long  as  the  enemy  remained  in 
their  present  position,  they  could  not  get  at  them  with  their 


F F 


218 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


cavalry,  nor  do  them  any  harm  ; so  they  made  a movement 
as  if  retreating,  when  Aguirre  left  his  cover  and  went  after 
the  royalists.  Now  it  was  that  some  of  the  king’s  people 
managed  to  get  possession  of  the  traitor’s  late  position,  pre- 
venting him  from  returning  to  it. 

The  king’s  party  thought  this  a good  moment  to  attack 
Aguirre  at  once  ; however  they  considered  it  more  advan- 
tageous to  commence  skirmishing.  Aguirre  now  implored 
a portion  of  his  soldiers  to  lose  no  time  in  keeping  up  their 
fire ; besides  these,  he  had  another  troop  with  their  loaded 
arquebuses,  ready  to  fire,  if  the  royalists  attempted  a general 
attack. 

3.  But  it  so  happened  (and  it  looked  like  a miracle)  that 
being  so  near  to  each  other,  and  many  of  Aguirre’s  party 
fighting  with  courage  and  the  desire  to  do  all  the  mischief 
they  could,  they  did  no  harm  to  either  man  or  horse  of 
the  royalists ; some  balls  were  seen,  which,  striking  about 
half  the  distance  they  ought  to  have  gone,  amongst  some 
horses,  became  as  flat  as  cakes,  sticking  on  the  hair  and 
skin  of  the  animals,  without  wounding  them.  However, 
the  king’s  party  (although  they  had  only  five  or  six  arque- 
buses) killed  Aguirre’s  horse  from  under  him,  and  wounded 
two  of  his  soldiers. 

During  the  skirmish  a captain  of  horse  (one  of  Aguirre’s 
confidants,  named  Diego  Tirado)  mounted  on  a mare,  and 
skirmishing  in  front  of  his  party,  thought  this  a good  oppor- 
tunity to  desert  to  the  royalists,  and  thus  save  his  life  (for 
he  had  taken  many  lives  away  whilst  he  had  been  with 
Aguirre)  ; so,  making  rather  a nearer  gallop  than  usual 
towards  the  enemy,  he  made  a dash  towards  the  royalists, 
and  got  in  amongst  them,  shouting  “ Long  live  the  king, 
long  live  the  king.” 

The  governor  and  others  received  Tirado  with  much 
pleasure ; when  he  told  the  royalists  on  no  account  to  make 
an  attack,  as  Aguirre  had  fifty  armed  arquebusiers  in  re- 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


219 


serve,  but  to  scatter  themselves,  so  that  he  could  not  get  a 
number  of  them  together,  and  send  in  a heavy  fire. 

The  royalists  took  this  course,  and  to  give  more  courage 
to  those  of  Aguirre’s  people  who  wished  to  desert  his  flag, 
the  governor  gave  Tirado  his  own  horse,  with  instructions 
to  go  and  skirmish  in  sight  of  the  traitor,  who  was  much 
affected  on  seeing  that  one  whom  he  considered  one  of  his 
best  friends,  had  turned  against  him  ; he,  however,  said  to 
those  about  him,  that  he  had  sent  Tirado  on  business  to  the 
governor. 

4.  At  the  same  time  that  Tirado  deserted  from  the  traitor, 
his  example  caused  another  horseman,  named  Francisco 
Caballero,  to  try  and  effect  his  escape ; but  he  did  not  suc- 
ceed. 

Both  parties  were  engaged  in  these  skirmishes,  with- 
out coming  to  a fight ; when  one  of  the  royalist  soldiers, 
named  Ledesma,  being  very  well  mounted,  gave  his  horse 
the  spur,  going  in  the  direction  of  Aguirre,  who,  seeing  him 
advance,  thought  the  soldier  was  deserting  to  him,  and  he 
shouted  out  to  his  men  not  to  fire  at  the  horseman,  for  that 
he  was  coming  over  to  them.  Ledesma,  having  arrived  within 
thirty  or  forty  paces  of  the  traitor,  was  surrounded  by  the 
Maranones,  when  he,  shouting  “Long  live  the  king,”  turned 
his  horse  and  galloped  back  to  his  camp ; and,  although  the 
Maranones  gave  him  a volley  from  their  arquebuses,  not  a 
shot  touched  him. 


220 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


CHAP.  L. 

1.  Aguirre , having  fears  of  the  desertion  of  his  men,  retires  to  his  entrench- 
ment. The  royalists  go  to  their  quarters,  but  with  hopes  of  victory 
over  the  traitor. — 2.  The  traitor  meditates  on  hilling  the  sick  and 
those  soldiers  he  has  fears  of , but  is  dissuaded  from  this. — 3.  He  takes 
their  arms  away  from  some  of  his  soldiers,  and  drives  away  others, 
telling  them  to  go  and  join  the  king's  camp. — 4.  One  of  Aguirre's 
soldiers  kills  Pedro  Bravo's  horse.  The  traitor  determines  to  return 
to  the  coast. 

1.  Aguirre  became  very  angry,  on  seeing  that  his  soldiers 
were  so  near  the  enemy,  and  with  such  good  firearms,  and 
that  they  did  the  king’s  people  no  harm  ; that  two  of  his  men 
had  deserted  ; and  that  his  horse  had  been  killed ; so,  with 
his  accustomed  fury,  he  said,  “ Marahones,  is  it  possible  that 
a few  herdsmen,  with  sheepskin  jackets  and  hide  bucklers, 
thus  shew  themselves  amongst  us,  and  you  do  not  bring 
them  to  the  earth  ?”  Aguirre  made  these  observations  in 
consequence  of  his  opponents  wearing  a sort  of  cloak  made 
of  the  skins  of  pumas  or  deer,  much  used  in  these  countries  of 
the  Indies ; their  swords  were  rusty,  their  lances  in  a simi- 
lar state.  He  also  had  his  suspicions  that  his  men,  instead 
of  firing  at  the  enemy,  fired  only  into  the  air ; so  he  began 
to  retire  to  his  entrenchment,  having  almost  to  drive  many 
of  them,  with  a halberd  he  carried.  Having  got  into  his 
quarters,  a Portuguese,  one  of  his  great  allies,  named  Gaspar 
Diaz,  secreted  himself  behind  a door,  armed  with  an  aguja 
or  sharp  instrument,  watching  for  the  coming  of  Francisco 
Caballero  (he  who  tried  to  desert  to  the  king’s  party,  but 
failed),  and,  thinking  he  would  please  Aguirre  by  what  he 
was  going  to  do,  as  Caballero  approached,  Diaz  shouted 
out,  “ Death  to  the  traitor,”  and  threw  the  aguja , which 
caught  the  soldier  in  his  partes  privaclas , causing  him  ex- 
cruciating pain ; some  others  who  came  up  would  have 
finished  Caballero,  had  not  the  traitor  (knowing  that  he  had 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


221 


not  been  very  culpable)  ordered  that  he  should  not  be  de- 
prived of  life,  but  that  they  should  do  their  best  to  cure  him. 

The  royalists,  observing  that  Aguirre  was  retiring  to  his 
quarters,  did  the  same,  feeling,  after  what  they  had  seen 
and  done,  that  the  victory  would  be  for  the  king.  They, 
however,  placed  a strong  guard  around  their  camp. 

2.  The  traitor,  seeing  that  his  own  people  were  doing 
mischief  amongst  themselves,  began  to  rate  them  soundly, 
calling  them  cowards  and  women-hearted  ; that  they  had 
showed  no  prowess  over  their  enemy,  even  with  the  great 
advantages  they  had  over  them  in  arms  and  in  the  affairs  of 
war,  and  that  it  appeared  to  him  that  they  made  war  with 
heaven,  as  they  pointed  their  guns  rather  at  the  stars  than 
at  the  men  they  had  before  them  ; this  behaviour  showed 
him  their  intentions,  and  if  this  was  the  way  they  con- 
tinued the  war,  they  would  soon  get  the  worst  of  it.  The 
soldiers  replied,  that  the  reason  why  the  balls  did  not  reach 
the  enemy  was  that  the  powder  was  bad. 

Aguirre  now  placed  some  of  his  best  friends  at  the  gate 
of  his  quarters,  as  was  his  custom,  to  guard  it,  and  prevent 
any  one  from  going  out.  It  was  manifest  to  the  traitor 
that  many  of  his  soldiers  followed  him  unwillingly,  and  that 
the  sick  were  an  encumbrance  to  him,  and,  fearing  that 
they  would  desert  to  the  enemy,  he  considered  it  advisable 
to  strangle  all  the  unwilling  and  the  sick ; and,  making  a 
list  of  such  as  were  to  suffer,  they  amounted  to  more  than 
fifty  in  number. 

But,  before  putting  this  design  into  execution,  he  thought 
he  would  communicate  with  some  of  his  friends  ; who  could 
not  help  looking  most  seriously  at  the  atrocity  of  the  meditated 
act,  and  reflecting  that  if  they  sanctioned  it,  they  would  be 
blamed  and  severely  punished  by  the  king’s  party,  in  case  they 
should  be  the  victors,  or  perhaps  God  put  it  into  their  hearts 
to  prevent  the  perdition  of  so  many  souls,  in  such  a manner. 
They  replied  that  the  affair  did  not  meet  their  approbation. 


222 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


for  it  might  happen  that,  in  the  belief  he  was  killing  only 
the  culpable  ones,  he  might  be  destroying  some  who  were 
only  awaiting  an  opportunity  to  serve  him  well. 

3.  After  much  discussion,  it  was  resolved  not  to  carry 
the  strangling  into  effect ; but  to  disarm  the  suspected,  and 
Aguirre  urged  his  friends  to  keep  a careful  watch  on  them, 
giving  his  confidants  directions,  in  case  the  suspected  ones 
made  any  attempt  to  escape,  to  kill  them  all. 

Aguirre  now  began  to  reflect  on  his  projected  return 
to  Piru,  and  that  he  had  met  with  great  impediments  and 
resistance,  and  the  idea  flitted  before  him  that  he  was  not 
to  be  victorious,  and  that  his  men  would  abandon  him. 
He  considered,  under  these  circumstances,  that  his  best 
course  would  be  to  make  for  the  sea  coast  with  all  his  fol 
lowers,  to  embark  wherever  he  could  find  vessels,  change 
his  route,  and  also  his  mode  of  life. 

These  views  and  fears  of  Aguirre  were  not  unknown  in 
the  king’s  camp,  and,  with  the  idea  of  increasing  his  diffi- 
culties, thirty  or  forty  of  the  royalist  horsemen  were  always 
on  the  watch  over  his  entrenchment,  to  prevent  any  of  his 
party  from  sallying  out  in  search  of  provisions,  and  also  to  en- 
courage those  who  wished  to  desert.  This  being  suspected 
by  the  traitor,  he  allowed  no  one  to  go  out  of  his  entrench- 
ment, not  even  his  confidants  (for  he  began  to  have  his  doubts 
of  them),  to  look  for  provisions,  of  which  they  were  so  much 
in  want,  that  they  were  obliged  to  kill  some  dogs  and  horses 
to  eat.  The  continuance  of  this  state  of  things  forced  his  con- 
fidential guards  to  leave  their  posts,  and  go  over  to  the  king’s 
side  by  ones  and  twos.  At  sight  of  this,  Aguirre’s  fears  in- 
creased ; but  he  still  dissembled,  and  made  it  known  that  he 
had  not  lost  confidence  in  his  best  followers,  of  whom  he 
sent  out  a considerable  number,  armed  with  arquebuses,  to 
watch  the  movements  of  the  maestro  del  campo,  and  captain 
Bravo;  who  hovered  about,  near  his  camp,  calling  upon  the 
traitor’s  followers  to  desert  him. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


223 


Aguirre’s  armed  troop  of  horse  went  forth,  and  soon  a war 
of  words  commenced  between  the  contending  parties,  the 
king’s  people  calling  the  others  traitors,  which  irritated 
them  very  much  ; and  they  replied  by  a volley  from  their 
arquebuses.  Bravo  now  tried  to  put  an  end  to  this  mode 
of  proceeding,  telling  his  men  that  it  was  not  politic  to  use 
such  language  to  their  opponents,  particularly  as  they  were 
of  the  same  nation,  but  rather  to  speak  to  them  in  fair  terms, 
and  so  try  to  induce  them  to  come  over  to  the  king’s  side. 

4.  Whilst  Bravo  was  thus  speaking  to  his  men,  and  not 
paying  much  attention  to  the  enemy,  one  of  them,  named 
Juan  de  Lescano,  a mestizo,  considering  that  Bravo  was  one 
of  the  most  active  against  his  party,  thought  it  a good  oppor- 
tunity to  be  revenged  on  him,  by  taking  good  aim  at  him 
with  his  arquebuse,  the  fire  from  which  only  killed  Bravo’s 
horse,  which  fell  to  the  ground  with  his  rider  ; but  God 
spared  Bravo.  Aguirre’s  men  believed  that  Bravo  had  been 
killed  also,  so  they  raised  a loud  shout  of  triumph,  for  until 
this  time  they  had  not  done  any  damage  to  the  royalists. 

The  king’s  party,  on  coming  up  and  finding  that  their 
commander  was  not  hurt,  returned  the  shout  with  a trium- 
phant cheer,  when  the  Marahones  retired  to  their  quarters. 
The  royalists  had  been  informed  by  recent  deserters  that 
Aguirre  had  formed  the  intention  of  proceeding  to  the  coast, 
and  that  he  had  disarmed  many  of  his  men,  observing  at  the 
same  time  that,  as  they  appeared  to  have  an  idea  of  desert- 
ing to  his  enemy,  it  was  not  well  they  should  go  with  their 
arms. 

We  now  arrive  at  Monday  morning,  which  was  the  vesper 
of  St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude,  the  27th  of  October,  1561,  when 
Aguirre  disarmed  the  greater  number  of  his  soldiers,  and, 
being  on  the  point  of  leaving  his  quarters,  his  soldiers  said 
to  him  that,  marching  without  arms,  was  as  good  as  taking 
them  to  be  slaughtered,  for  how  could  they  defend  them- 
selves against  the  king’s  party  ? This  they  said  to  the  traitor 


224 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


in  a courageous  sort  of  manner,  which  appeared  to  Aguirre 
to  look  like  a mutiny  against  him  ; but  he  now  considered  it 
prudent  on  his  part  to  return  them  their  arms,  making  a 
virtue  of  necessity,  telling  them  blandly,  that  he  begged  they 
would  pardon  him,  for  that  this  was  the  only  error  he  had 
committed  during  the  whole  expedition,  and  that  it  was  but 
just  that  they  should  look  over  it,  also  that  his  intentions 
were  very  different  from  what  his  acts  might  lead  them  to 
suppose ; however,  some  of  the  soldiers  refused  to  receive 
their  arms  (for  they  were  sorely  offended  at  being  dis- 
armed), and  Aguirre  in  person  had  to  beg  of  them  not  to 
refuse. 


CHAP.  LI. 

1.  The  maestro  del  campo  and  captain  Bravo  come  up  towards  Aguirre’s 
entrenchment.  Some  soldiers  go  out  to  oppose  them. — 2.  Captain 
Espindola,  with  a troop , deserts  to  the  royalists , and  all  the  rest  of 
Aguirre’s  soldiers  follow  their  example  by  various  routes. — 3.  The 
maestro  del  campo  sends  news  of  the  victory  to  the  governor. 
Aguirre  kills  his  daughter. — 4.  Aguirre  is  killed  by  two  arquebuses 
fired  at  him.  His  head  is  cut  off , and  his  hands  are  given  to  those 
from  Merida  and  Valencia. 

1.  Aguirre  was  now  occupied  in  this  move  to  the  coast  by 
daylight  (although  there  were  some  who  advised  him  to  get 
out  at  night,  so  that  he  might  not  be  observed  by  the  enemy). 
He  also  desired  to  kill  one  of  his  captains,  named  Juan  Gero- 
nymo  de  Espindola,  for  some  bold  words  he  had  uttered*  but 
there  were  none  who  would  help  him  to  execute  Espindola. 
At  this  juncture,  captain  Bravo  and  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes 
came,  accompanied  by  a considerable  mounted  force,  towards 
Aguirre’s  quarters,  having  heard  that  he  was  about  to  march 
to  the  coast.  They  began  shouting  to  the  traitor’s  followers 
that  he  was  deceiving  them  in  all  he  was  doing ; that  they 
should  trust  him  no  longer,  but  come  over  to  the  king’s 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


225 


side  at  once.  Whilst  they  were  instigating  the  Maranones 
to  desert,  they  perceived,  as  they  had  done  some  days 
before,  other  Indian  servants  at  the  stream  which  was  near 
the  entrenchment;  so  captain  Bravo  and  the  maestro  del 
campo  went  out  with  fourteen  or  fifteen  men,  determined  to 
catch  them,  telling  those  who  remained  on  the  heights  that 
if  they  saw  any  of  the  traitor’s  men  go  forth  to  encounter 
them,  to  make  a sign  with  a drawn  sword : they  then 
descended  secretly  to  where  the  Indians  were,  but  they 
were  perceived  by  some  of  the  Maranones,  who  were  outside 
the  entrenchment,  trying  to  prevent,  with  their  arquebuses, 
the  advance  of  those  whom  Bravo  had  left  on  the  heights. 
Aguirre,  being  informed  of  what  was  going  on,  sent  Juan 
Geronymo  de  Espindola  with  fifteen  arquebusiers  to  defend 
and  bring  the  Indians  in ; this  movement  was  observed  by 
the  king’s  party  who  were  on  the  heights,  who  made  the 
concerted  sign  by  brandishing  a drawn  sword. 

2.  Although  Bravo  saw  the  signal,  he  pushed  onwards, 
but  when  he  descried  Espindola  and  his  companions  on  the 
plain,  he  thought  it  prudent  to  retire,  and  join  his  party  on 
the  heights,  fearing  the  fire  of  their  arquebuses,  for  the  royal- 
ists had  scarcely  any  firearms  with  them.  Espindola  and  his 
party,  seeing  this,  quickened  their  pace  towards  the  retiring 
royalists,  and,  on  nearing  them,  shouted  “Long  live  the 
king,  caballeros!  long  live  the  king!”  this  being  heard  by 
the  maestro  del  campo  and  Bravo,  they  halted  at.  once, 
awaiting  the  arrival  of  Espindola  and  his  friends,  when  they 
mutually  saluted  each  other  in  a most  friendly  manner.  The 
Maranones  declared  themselves  for  the  king,  and  were  taken 
to  the  heights,  each  behind  a royalist  horseman. 

Bravo  now  requested  Espindola  to  remain  in  sight  of 
Aguirre’s  quarters,  in  company  with  the  maestro  del  campo, 
whilst  he  posted  off  to  the  governor  with  the  deserters. 

Aguirre  was  now  seen  to  be  outside  his  quarters,  observ- 
ing the  movements  of  the  royalists,  and  it  appeared  to 


G G 


226 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


them  that  his  destruction  was  fast  approaching,  for  as 
Espindola  had  deserted  him,  in  like  manner  did  the 
others,  who,  under  plea  of  attacking  the  royalists,  marched 
out  in  sight  of  Aguirre  and  joined  the  king’s  men,  shout- 
ing “ Long  live  the  king,  to  whose  service  we  come.”  The 
maestro  del  campo  received  them  most  courteously,  and 
they  begged  of  him  to  descend  to  the  entrenchment,  saying 
that  those  who  were  within  would  not  defend  the  place, 
but  would  come  over  to  him,  for  they  were  of  the  number 
that  Aguirre  put  but  little  confidence  in. 

Whilst  this  was  going  on,  the  captain  Juan  de  Aguirre 
Navarro,  with  some  of  his  comrades,  meditated  on  killing 
Aguirre,  but  did  not  find  the  opportunity.  When  they 
observed  the  maestro  del  campo  coming  down  to  their  en- 
trenchment, they  sallied  forth  to  receive  him,  offering  their 
services  to  him,  and  crying  out,  as  the  rest  had  done,  “Long 
live  the  king!”  This  was  the  last  lot  of  the  Marafiones  who 
remained  under  the  traitor’s  bloody  banner,  for  the  rest 
of  his  followers,  whilst  Aguirre  was  watching  operations 
outside  his  entrenchment,  had  escaped  by  an  old  gate, 
which  Anton  Llamoso  was  repairing  (he  it  was  who  knocked 
out  the  brains  of  the  maestro  del  campo  at  Margarita),  who 
would  not  leave  his  tyrant  master,  saying  that  Aguirre 
had  been  his  friend  in  life,  and  that  he  would  live  or  die  by 
his  side.  Meanwhile  Garcia  de  Paredes,  with  his  forces, 
was  approaching  Aguirre’s  quarters,  to  take  the  life  of  the 
traitor. 

3.  The  maestro  del  campo,  seeing  that  he  had  the  victory 
in  his  own  hands,  despatched  a mounted  messenger  to  in- 
form the  governor  and  others  as  to  the  satisfactory  state  of 
affairs,  and  then  marched  straight  on  Aguirre’s  quarters. 

The  traitor,  on  seeing  that  he  had  been  abandoned  by  all 
except  Llamoso,  asked  him  why  he  had  not  gone  with  the 
rest,  and  taken  advantage  of  the  king’s  pardon  ? Llamoso 
replied  that  he  and  Aguirre  had  been  friends  in  life,  and 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


227 


that  he  would  live  or  die  with  him.  Aguirre  made  no  reply; 
he  was  crestfallen  and  lost ; he  went  into  an  apartment 
where  his  daughter  was  (who  was  now  a woman)  in  company 
with  another  female,  named  Torralva,  of  Molina  de  Arragon 
in  Castile,  who  had  come  from  Piru  in  company  with  the 
traitors.  She  cannot  have  been  of  great  age,  for,  in  the  year 
one  thousand  six  hundred  and  twelve,  I saw  her  (she  was 
then  very  young)  in  the  city  of  Barquicimeto.  The  devil  in- 
stigated Aguirre  to  kill  his  daughter,  so  as  to  crown  all  his 
cruel  acts  with  this  most  bloody  and  unnatural  one,  that  of 
the  destruction  of  his  own  flesh  and  blood.  He  said  to 
her,  “ Commend  thyself  to  God,  my  daughter,  for  I am 
about  to  kill  thee ; that  thou  mayest  not  be  pointed  at 
with  scorn,  nor  be  in  the  power  of  any  one  who  may  call 
thee  the  daughter  of  a traitor.”  Torralva  tried  to  save  the 
girl,  and  even  managed  to  take  the  loaded  arquebuse  from 
the  hands  of  the  father,  with  which  he  was  about  to  fire  at 
his  victim ; but  Aguirre  had  a poniard,  and  with  it  he  took 
her  life.1  Having  done  this,  he  rushed  to  the  door  of  the 
apartment ; but  when  he  perceived  that  the  king’s  forces 
were  upon  him,  his  very  hands  lost  the  power  of  firing  off 
his  arquebuse  at  them,  so  as  to  sell  his  life  dearly;  and, 
in  the  most  dejected  manner,  he  threw  all  his  arms  on  the 
ground,  and  went  and  leant  upon  a miserable  barbacoa  or 
bed  place  that  was  in  the  room  (opposite  that  in  which  he 
had  killed  his  daughter).  One  of  the  first  to  enter  (before 
the  maestro  del  campo),  was  one  Ledesma,  a sword-cutler 
and  inhabitant  of  Tocuyo ; who,  when  he  saw  Garcia  de 
Paredes  enter,  thinking  to  make  himself  of  importance, 
said,  “ Here  have  I Aguirre  as  my  prisoner.”  The  traitor 
replied,  “I  do  not  give  myself  up  to  such  a villain  as  you ;” 
and  perceiving  Paredes,  said,  “ Senor  maestro  del  campo, 
I beg  that  you,  who  are  a caballero,  will  respect  my  rank, 

1 Castellanos  makes  Aguirre  say  to  his  daughter,  “ Die ! because  I 
must  die.” 


228 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


and  listen,  for  I have  many  important  things  to  say,  for  the 
good  of  the  king’s  service.” 

4.  Garcia  de  Paredes  replied  that  he  should  be  respected; 
but  some  of  Aguirre’s  former  soldiers,  fearing  if  he  were 
allowed  to  live  it  might  go  hard  with  them — for  he  might 
reveal  what  they  had  done  during  the  expedition — persuaded 
the  maestro  del  campo  that  the  best,  safest,  and  most 
honourable  course  was  to  cut  off  his  head  at  once,  and  before 
the  governor’s  arrival.  This  view  of  the  case  did  not  dis- 
please the  maestro  del  campo,  so  he  told  Aguirre  to  prepare 
himself  for  death,  and  commanded  two  of  his  own  Maranones 
to  shoot  him  down  with  their  arquebuses.  This  they  did  at 
once,  and  the  traitor  fell  dead  at  their  feet.  It  is,  however, 
said  that  having  received  the  fire  of  the  first  arquebuse  in 
a slanting  direction,  he  said  it  was  not  well  aimed ; but  the 
second  was  fired  at  his  breast,  and  he  said,  tf  That  has  done 
the  business,”  and  then  fell  dead.  A soldier  named 
Custodio  Hernandez  now  fell  upon  the  dead  body,  and,  by 
order  of  the  maestro  del  campo,  cut  the  head  off,  and,  taking 
hold  of  the  hair,  which  was  very  long,  he  brought  it  out  to 
show  it  to  the  governor,  who  was  just  arriving,  thinking  to 
do  him  honour.1 

The  maestro  del  campo  (for  it  was  his  prize)  sought  for 
the  flags  and  standards,  and,  going  up  with  them  to  the 
chapel  that  was  above  the  entrenchment,  let  them  blow 

1 “At  Cumana,  before  the  earthquake  of  December  14th,  1797,  a 
strong  smell  of  sulphur  was  perceived  near  the  hill  of  the  convent  of 
St.  Francis  ; at  the  same  time  flames  appeared  on  the  banks  of  the 
Manzanares,  and  in  the  gulf  of  Cariaco,  near  Mariquitar.  This  last 
phenomenon  is  pretty  frequent  in  the  Alpine  calcareous  mountains  near 
Cumanacou,  and  in  the  island  of  Margarita,  also  amidst  the  llanos  of 
New  Andalusia,  where  flakes  of  fire  rise  to  a considerable  height. 

“ This  fire,  which  is  like  the  Will  o’  the  Wisp  of  our  marshes,  does  not 
burn  the  grass.  The  people  call  these  reddish  flames  1 the  soul  of  the 
traitor  Aguirre,’  and  the  natives  of  Barquecimeto  believe  that  the  soul 
of  the  traitor  wanders  in  the  savannahs,  lik^  a flame  that  flies  the  ap- 
proach of  men.”- — Ilumboldt , Narr. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


229 


out;  but  seeing  that  the  governor  was  approaching,  he  went 
off  to  meet  him,  dragging  the  flags  after  him  as  a signal  of 
victory.  The  governor  was  not  well  pleased  that  they  had 
shot  the  traitor  without  his  permission ; but,  concealing 
his  feelings  because  the  thing  was  now  done,  he  ordered 
Aguirre’s  daughter  to  be  buried  in  the  Church,  and  the 
father  to  be  quartered,  and  thrown  out  in  the  road. 

The  traitor’s  head  was  taken  to  the  city  of  Toeuyo  and 
placed  in  an  iron  cage,  where  it  remained  many  days  as  a 
warning  to  evil-doers : his  skull  is  still  at  the  same  place, 
with  his  flags ; also  the  bodice  and  mantle  of  yellow  silk 
worn  by  his  daughter  when  her  father  killed  her,  with  the 
poniard  marks  in  them. 

Captain  Bravo,  and  his  soldiers  of  Merida,  as  well  as  those 
of  Valencia,  to  preserve  a memorial  of  their  doings  in  the 
king’s  service,  wished  to  have  some  of  the  traitor’s  flags ; 
to  this  the  governor  and  his  followers  would  not  assent,  but 
offered  the  hands  of  Aguirre  to  the  towns  of  Merida  and 
Valencia,  so  that  they  might  place  a hand  on  the  rollo , 
in  the  respective  towns.  This  was  agreed  to,  Valencia 
having  the  left,  Merida  the  right  hand,  which  were  carried 
to  the  said  towns  on  the  point  of  a -lance. 

The  soldiers  from  Valencia  took  their  leave,  but  on  the 
road,  it  struck  them  that  their  portion  of  the  booty  (the 
hand  of  Aguirre)  was  of  so  little  importance  that  they 
threw  it  to  the  dogs,  who  ate  it ; but  it  is  true  that  those 
of  Merida,  on  their  way  home,  and  passing  the  famous 
river  Mototan,  threw  the  hand  that  had  fallen  to  them  into 
that  river,  and  in  this  way  got  rid  of  the  bad  smell  which  the 
putrefying  hand  was  giving  out. 

The  captain  Pedro  Bravo  de  Molina,  with  his  people  of 
Merida,  had  behaved  so  courageously  on  all  occasions, 
particularly  in  this  affair  against  the  traitor,  in  which  they 
had  taken  a principal  share,  that  in  due  time  the  king 
largely  rewarded  them  for  such  important  services. 


230 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


The  general  maestro  del  campo  Diego  Garcia  de  Paredes 
went  to  Castile  to  seek  his  reward  shortly  afterwards,  and 
the  king  made  him  governor  of  Popoyan,  which  post  he  did 
not  long  enjoy.1  General  Gutierrez  de  la  Pena  was  made 
a mariscal.  He  who  profited  least  by  the  overthrow  of 
Aguirre  was  the  governor  Collado,  for  the  people  of  his 
district,  having  taken  umbrage  at  some  of  his  proceed- 
ings, took  care  to  tarnish  the  good  actions  that  he  had 
done. 


CHAP.  LII. 

1.  Gives  an  account  of  the  country  Aguirre  came  from,  his  character  and 
customs. — 2.  His  occupations  during  the  year  he  was  in  Pirin. — 
3.  An  account  of  the  depredations  he  committed. — 4.  Although  the 
governor  kept  his  promise  of  protection,  with  some  of  the  Marahones, 
yet  some  were  punished. 

1.  Lope  de  Aguirre  was  a Guipuzcoan  of  the  town  of 
Ohate,  his  parents  were  hidalgos,  persons  of  fair  standing, 
but  whose  names  we  have  not  been  able  to  find.  When 
the  traitor  was  killed,  he  was  a little  more  than  fifty  years 
of  age,  of  short  stature,  and  sparely  made,  ill-featured,  the 
face  small  and  lean,  beard  black,  the  eyes  like  a hawk’s, 
and  when  he  looked,  he  fixed  them  sternly,  particularly 
when  angry ; he  was  a great  and  noisy  talker ; when  well 
supported  he  was  most  determined,  but  without  support  he 
was  a coward ; he  was  very  hardy,  and  could  bear  much 
fatigue,  on  foot  as  well  as  on  horseback ; he  always  went 
armed,  and  well  protected,  and  never  was  without  one  or 
two  coats  of  mail,  a breast-plate  of  steel,  sword,  dagger, 

1 Diego  Garcia  never  reached  Popayan,  having  been  killed  by  some 
Indians,  when  he  landed  on  the  coast  of  Venezuela. 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


231 


arquebuse,  and  lance;  he  slept  but  little,  especially  at  night, 
but  he  reposed  during  the  day ; he  was  the  enemy  of  good 
men  and  good  actions,  particularly  of  praying,  and  he 
would  allow  no  one  to  pray  in  his  presence  ; so  when  he  saw 
any  of  his  soldiers  with  rosaries  in  their  hands,  he  took 
them  away,  breaking  them  up,  and  saying  that  he  did  not 
want  Christian  soldiers,  nor  praying  ones,  that  such  occu- 
pations were  only  fit  for  monks  and  nuns,  who  understood 
such  things ; but  that  if  necessary  his  men  should  play  with 
the  devil  at  dice  for  their  souls.  He  sometimes  told  his  men 
that  God  had  heaven  for  those  who  chose  to  serve  him,  but 
that  the  earth  was  for  the  strongest  arm ; that  he  knew  for 
certain  there  was  no  salvation,  and  that  being  in  life  was  to 
be  in  hell ; and  that  as  he  could  not  be  blacker  than  the 
crow,  he  would  commit  every  species  of  wickedness  and 
cruelty,  so  that  his  name  might  ring  throughout  the  earth, 
and  even  to  the  ninth  heaven ; that  he  would  not  spare  his 
prisoners  for  the  fear  of  hell,  but  that  he  would  commit  all 
the  cruelties  he  had  the  appetite  for ; that  belief  in  God 
alone  would  take  any  one  to  heaven ; that  he  would  show 
Adam’s  will  to  the  king  of  Castile,  to  see  if  he  had  left  him 
as  his  heir  to  the  Indies. 

2.  Aguirre  lived  in  Piru  more  than  twenty  years,  in  a 
very  different  manner  from  the  life  he  led  in  his  last  days, 
as  he  told  the  king  in  the  letter  he  wrote  to  his  majesty. 
His  occupation  in  early  days  was  that  of  a horse  breaker,  for 
himself,  as  well  as  for  others,  his  own  stock  daily  increasing. 
He  was  always  of  a turbulent  disposition,  and  a lover  of 
revolts  and  mutinies,  and  during  the  time  he  was  in  Piru, 
he  was  engaged  in  nearly  all  them.  It  is  not  known  that  he 
had  ever  served  under  any  noble  banner,  or  even  quite  law- 
fully under  the  king’s  standard.  He,  however,  went  with 
Diego  de  Pojas  amongst  the  Chunchos  Indians  ; then  with 
captain  Pedro  Alvarez  Holguin,  to  the  assistance  of  Vaca  de 
Castro,  but,  just  before  the  battle  of  Chupas,  he  hid  himself 


232 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


in  Guamanga,  so  as  not  to  be  in  that  engagement.  In  the 
rising  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  although  he  was  nominated  as 
alguazil  de  verdugo  (probably  assistant  to  the  public  execu- 
tioner), he  remained  in  Nicaragua,  and  did  not  return  to 
Piru,  until  after  the  battle  of  Xaquixaguana.  Afterwards 
he  was  concerned  in  several  mutinies  which  did  not  suc- 
ceed ; and  with  Don  Sebastian  de  Castilla  in  the  affair  of 
the  death  of  general  Pedro  Alfonso  de  Inojosa,  the  corregi- 
dor  of  Las  Charcas  ; and,  as  one  of  the  principal  actors  in 
this  mutiny,  he  was  condemned  to  death,  and  would  have 
been  executed,  had  he  not  escaped  and  hid  himself.  The 
mariscal  Alonso  Alvarado  caused  a strict  search  to  be  made 
for  him,  but  without  success.  He  then  rebelled  against  the 
king,  with  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  but  the  oidores  of 
Piru,  having  offered  a general  pardon  to  all  those  who  had 
been  in  mutinies  and  rebellions,  if  they  would  come  in  and 
serve  the  king  in  the  war  against  Francisco  FXernandez,  he 
took  advantage  of  the  offer,  and  rallied  under  the  royal 
standard,  when  he  was  present  in  an  encounter  where  he 
was  wounded  in  the  leg  ; but  he  was  not  very  much  dis- 
pleased, for  his  wound  prevented  him  from  being  exposed 
in  the  succeeding  battle.1 

1 After  the  defeat  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  the  pacification  of  Peru, 
as  related  by  Robertson  and  Prescott,  there  were  several  commotions 
before  the  land  of  the  Incas  quietly  settled  down  to  the  dead  level  of  the 
Spanish  colonial  system,  and  the  last  hot  blood  was  sent  away  down  the 
Amazons,  under  the  weak  guidance  of  Pedro  de  Ursua.  Yery  soon  after 
the  departure  of  the  president  La  Gasca,  a party  of  soldiers  under  Don 
Sebastian  de  Castilla  rose  in  Charcas,  and  murdered  the  corregidor, 
Pedro  de  Hinojosa,  and  his  lieutenant,  Alonzo  de  Castro.  The  royal 
auditors  sent  the  marshal,  Don  Alonzo  de  Alvarado,  to  quell  this  revolt, 
who  crushed  the  insurgents  with  great  severity  by  deaths,  floggings, 
and  imprisonments,  between  July  and  November,  1553  ; when  he  re- 
ceived news  of  the  rebellion  of  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  in  Cuzco. 
The  extreme  severity  of  the  marshal  in  Charcas,  and  the  discontent  of 
the  soldiers  at  not  being  permitted  to  use  the  Indians  as  beasts  of 
burden,  enabled  Giron  to  assemble  a number  of  discontented  spirits  ; 
and,  on  the  occasion  of  a wedding  feast  at  Cuzco,  on  November  13th, 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


233 


He  mixed  himself  up  in  so  many  seditions  in  various 
parts,  that  he  could  not  be  tolerated  in  the  country.  He 
was  driven  from  one  province  to  another,  and  was  known  as 
Aguirre  the  madman.1  In  Cuzco  they  nearly  hung  him  for 

1553,  he  seized  the  corregidor,  let  the  prisoners  loose,  and  formed  a rebel 
army.  Giron  then  marched  to  Guamanga,  to  encounter  the  royal  forces, 
and  continued  his  advance  to  Nasca,  on  the  coast  of  Peru,  south  of  Lima, 
where  he  formed  a regiment  of  negro  slaves.  Meanwhile  Alvarado 
marched  from  Charcas,  through  Cuzco,  in  pursuit  of  Giron,  and  the  two 
forces  approached  each  other  at  Chuquinga,  in  the  bleak  region  of  the 
Cordilleras.  A battle  followed,  in  which  the  royal  army  under  Alvarado 
was  entirely  defeated  and  dispersed.  Giron  then  crossed  the  bridge 
over  the  river  Apurinac,  and  passing  Cuzco,  encamped  in  the  valley  of 
Urcos.  The  royal  army  followed  him  from  Guamanga,  marched  through 
Cuzco,  and  Giron  retired  before  it,  until  at  length  he  determined  to  make 
a stand  at  Pucara  ; where  he  fortified  himself  in  a strong  position.  On 
the  approach  of  the  royalists,  however,  he  sallied  out  at  night,  a panic 
seized  his  troops,  and  they  were  thrown  into  confusion.  Giron  fled 
alone,  but  was  captured,  brought  to  Lima,  and  publicly  executed.  His 
head  was  hung  up  in  an  iron  cage,  beside  those  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and 
Carbajal ; but  all  three  were  soon  afterwards  stolen  away  at  night,  and 
secretly  buried  by  some  friends  of  the  wife  of  Giron.  In  1557  the  vice- 
roy marquis  of  Cahete  arrived  at  Lima,  and  completed  the  pacification 
of  Peru. 

Aguirre  was  mixed  up  in  the  rebellions  of  Castilla,  and  of  Giron,  and 
was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Chuquinga. 

1 A curious  anecdote  of  a soldier  named  Aguirre,  is  given  by  Garci- 
lasso  Inca  de  la  Yega  (lib.  vi,  cap.  xvii,  del  2°  parte),  and  it  is  very  pro- 
bable that  this  soldier  was  the  identical  Lope  de  Aguirre  of  the  narra- 
tive. It  is  as  follows  : — “ In  1548  a party  of  two  hundred  soldiers  were 
leaving  Potosi,  on  their  way  to  Tucuman,  with  laden  Indians  carrying 
their  baggage,  though  the  judges  of  the  Royal  Audience  had  forbidden 
that  services  of  this  nature  should  be  exacted  from  the  natives.  The 
licentiate  Esquivel,  who  was  the  alcalde  mayor,  came  out  to  witness  the 
departure  of  the  soldiers,  and  allowed  them  all  to  pass  with  their  laden 
Indians,  except  the  last,  one  Aguirre,  whom  he  seized,  and  a few  days 
afterwards  he  sentenced  him  to  receive  two  hundred  lashes  ; because  he 
had  not  sufficient  gold  and  silver  to  pay  the  fine  which  was  ordered  to 
be  levied  on  those  who  pressed  Indians.  The  soldier  Aguirre,  having 
received  a notification  of  the  sentence,  besought  the  alcalde  that,  instead 
of  flogging  him,  he  would  put  him  to  death,  for  that  he  was  a gentleman 
by  birth,  and  the  brother  of  a man  who  was  the  lord  of  vassals  in  Spain. 
All  this  had  no  effect  on  the  alcalde,  who  ordered  the  executioner  to 


H H 


£34 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


a mutiny  against  the  king,  in  which  he  was  concerned  with 
Lorenzo  de  Salduendo  (whom,  as  we  have  already  seen, 

bring  a beast,  and  execute  the  sentence.  The  executioner  came  to  the 
prison,  and  put  Aguirre  on  the  beast : but  all  the  principal  people  of  the 
town  went  to  the  alcalde,  entreating  him  not  to  execute  so  rigorous 
a sentence,  and  he  at  length  consented  to  delay  it  for  eight  days.  When 
they  came  to  the  prison,  they  found  that  Aguirre  was  already  stripped, 
and  mounted  on  the  beast  ; and,  on  hearing  that  the  punishment  was 
only  delayed  for  eight  days,  he  said  : 1 I prayed  that  I might  not  be  put 
on  this  beast,  and  stripped  naked,  as  I now  am,  but  now  that  I have 
come  to  this,  I prefer  to  suffer  at  once,  rather  than  bear  the  suspense  of 
eight  more  days.’  On  saying  this,  the  beast  was  driven  on,  and  he  re- 
ceived the  lashes,  amidst  the  grief  of  both  Spaniards  and  Indians,  at 
seeing  so  cruel  and  causeless  a disgrace  inflicted  on  a gentleman  by 
birth. 

“ Aguirre  refused  to  proceed  to  Tucuman,  but  remained  in  Peru,  and, 
when  the  period  of  Esquivel’s  office  expired,  he  followed  him  about, 
with  the  intention  of  killing  him,  to  avenge  the  indignity  which  he  had 
suffered  at  his  hands.  Esquivel  went  to  Lima,  a distance  of  three  hun- 
dred and  twenty  leagues,  but  within  fifteen  days  Aguirre  was  with  him. 
Thence  the  judge  fled  to  Quito,  a journey  of  four  hundred  leagues,  but 
in  little  more  than  twenty  days  Aguirre  was  there  also.  When  Esquivel 
heard  of  his  presence,  he  made  another  journey  of  five  hundred  leagues, 
to  Cuzco  ; but  in  a few  days  Aguirre  also  arrived,  having  travelled  on 
foot,  and  without  shoes  ; saying  that  a whipped  man  has  no  business  to 
ride  a horse,  or  to  go  where  he  would  be  seen  by  others.  In  this  way 
Aguirre  followed  his  judge  for  three  years,  and  four  months.  Esquivel, 
being  tired  of  so  many  weary  journeys,  which  were  of  no  use,  deter- 
mined to  settle  at  Cuzco,  because  there  was  a judge  there,  who  was  so 
strict,  that  he  thought  Aguirre  would  not  dare  to  attack  him.  He, 
therefore,  took  a house,  near  the  cathedral,  and  always  wore  a sword 
and  dagger,  though  arms  were  not  worn  by  men  of  his  profession  ; saying 
that  he  now  had  no  reason  to  fear  a little  man  like  Aguirre.  However, 
on  a certain  Monday,  at  noon,  Aguirre  entered  his  house,  and  having 
walked  all  over  it,  and  having  traversed  a corridor,  a saloon,  a chamber, 
and  an  inner  chaiqber  where  the  judge  kept  his  books,  he  at  last  found 
him  asleep  over  one  of  his  books,  and  stabbed  him  to  death.  The  mur- 
derer then  went  out,  but,  when  he  came  to  the  door  of  the  house,  he 
found  that  he  had  forgotten  his  hat,  and  had  the  temerity  to  return 
and  fetch  it,  and  then  walked  down  the  street.  He  passed  the  church 
of  San  Francisco,  and  came  to  the  open  space  on  which  they  were  build- 
ing the  nunnery  of  Santa  Clara,  where  he  met  two  young  gentlemen, 
brothers-in-law  of  one  Rodrigo  de  Pineda  ; and  said  to  them,  ‘ Hide  me ! 
Hide  me  !’  without  another  word.  The  lads,  who  knew  his  story, 


THE  TRAITOR  AGUIRRE. 


235 


Aguirre  killed).  He  was  cast  into  prison,  and  although  he 
escaped  into  the  woods,  he  was  much  sought  after  by  the 

asked  him  if  he  had  killed  the  licentiate  Esquivel ; and  he  replied, 

4 Yes,  sirs  ! hide  me,  hide  me  !’  They  then  took  him  into  the  house  of 
their  brother-in-law,  and  concealed  him  in  an  enclosure  where  the 
bullocks  were  kept,  at  the  back  of  the  house,  telling  him  not  to  come 
out  on  any  account,  nor  even  to  raise  his  head,  for  fear  some  Indian 
should  see  him,  and  promising  to  bring  him  food,  without  any  one 
knowing  it.  These  boys,  when  they  were  eating  their  suppers  at  their 
brother-in-law’s  house,  slipped  bread  and  meat  into  their  pockets,  and, 
after  supper,  took  the  food  to  poor  Aguirre.  This  continued  for  forty 
days.  Meanwhile,  when  the  corregidor  heard  of  the  death  of  Esquivel, 
he  ordered  the  bells  to  be  rung,  and  placed  guards  at  the  gates  of  the 
churches  and  convents,  and  on  the  roads  leading  from  the  city,  so  that 
no  man  could  depart  without  permission  ; but  no  tidings  could  be  ob- 
tained of  Aguirre.  At  the  end  of  thirty  days  the  strictness  of  the  watch 
was  relaxed,  and  the  sentries  were  taken  off  the  churches,  but  not  off 
the  high  roads,  which  were  still  carefully  guarded.  At  the  end  of  forty 
days  it  appeared  to  certain  gentlemen,  named  Santillan  and  Cataho,  that 
it  would  be  well  to  rescue  Aguirre  from  the  severity  of  the  judge,  by 
taking  him  out  of  the  city  publicly,  instead  of  attempting  to  effect  his 
escape  in  secret.  He  was,  therefore,  dressed  as  a negro,  for  which  pur- 
pose his  hair  and  beard  were  cut,  and  his  face,  neck,  hands,  and  arms 
up  to  the  elbows,  were  washed  with  water  which  had  been  mixed  with  a 
wild  fruit  called  by  the  Indians  vitoc,  that  has  the  effect  of  making  the 
skin  black,  but  is  of  no  other  use.  They  then  dressed  him  as  a vile 
negro,  and  one  day,  at  noon,  they  went  out  with  him  through  the  streets, 
to  the  hill  called  Carmenca.  He  walked  on  foot,  before  his  masters, 
with  an  arquebuse  on  his  shoulder.  Thus  they  reached  the  outskirts  of 
the  town,  where  the  guards  were  posted,  who  asked  them  if  they  had 
permission  from  the  corregidor,  to  leave  the  city.  One  of  them  then 
said  to  the  other,  a Walk  on  slowly,  while  I go  back  to  get  the  permit, 
and  I will  soon  catch  you  up.”  The  other  then  went  on  with  his  negro, 
until  they  had  passed  the  jurisdiction  of  Cuzco  ; and,  having  bought  a 
pony,  and  given  Aguirre  some  money,  he  said  to  him,  ‘Brother!  you  are 
now  free,  and  I can  do  no  more  for  you.’  He  then  returned  to  Cuzco, 
and  Aguirre  went  on  to  Guamanga,  where  he  had  a near  relation,  a rich 
man,  and  one  of  the  principal  people  of  that  city.  This  relation  re- 
ceived him  as  if  he  had  been  his  own  son,  and  sent  him  away,  after  some 
days,  well  provided  with  necessaries.  Thus  Aguirre  escaped,  and  this 
was  one  of  the  most  wonderful  things  that  happened  in  Peru  in  those 
times.  The  insolent  soldiers  said  that  if  there  were  more  Aguirres  in 
the  world,  judges  would  not  be  so  free  and  tyrannical.” 

If  this  murderer  of  Esquivel  was  the  identical  Lope  de  Aguirre,  the 


236 


THE  CRUIZE  OF 


authorities,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  that  he  joined  the  ex- 
pedition of  Pedro  de  Ursua,  with  the  intention  of  attempt- 
ing and  committing  all  sorts  of  crimes  and  enormities.  It 
was  also  reported  that  Pedro  de  Ursua’s  object  in  going  on 
this  expedition,  was  to  return  in  arms  against  Piru,  as  we 
have  already  mentioned. 

3.  Having  arrived  at  the  town  of  the  Motilones,  and, 
understanding  that  Ursua’s  intentions  were  different  from 
what  Aguirre  had  supposed,  and  that  Ursua  was  faithful  to 
his  king,  he  proposed  to  kill  him,  and  to  raise  Don  Martin  to 
be  the  general,  he  whom  Ursua  obliged  to  return  to  Piru,  but 
as  this  was  not  effected,  Aguirre  killed  Pedro  de  Ursua  and 
many  others  ; and  in  the  short  space  of  five  months  and  five 
days,  the  duration  of  the  reign  of  his  tyranny,  he  took  the 
lives  of  sixty  Spaniards  ; amongst  them  one  priest,  two 
monks  of  the  order  of  Santo  Domingo,  four  women,  and  his 
own  daughter ; destroyed  four  Spanish  towns,  pillaging  all 
the  estates  he  came  near,  of  all  of  which  he  spoke  very  dif- 
ferently in  the  letter  he  wrote  to  the  king ; in  which  he  said 
that  the  reason  why  he  had  rebelled,  and  thrown  off  his 
allegiance,  was  because  his  services  had  not  been  rewarded. 
We  have  seen  the  class  of  services  he  rendered,  which  we 
will  not  repeat  here. 

4.  The  licenciate  Pablo  Collado,  governor  of  Venezuela, 
kept  the  promises  of  pardon  he  had  made  in  the  name  of 
the  king,  with  all  those  who  had  passed  over  to  the  royalist 
side,  treating  them  well  whilst  he  remained  in  his  district ; 
he  also  gave  them  permission  to  go  where  they  thought 

indignity  he  suffered  at  Potosi,  and  his  long  thirst  after  vengeance, 
may  have  been  active  instruments  in  forming  his  inexorably  cruel  cha- 
racter. 

Lope  de  Aguirre  was  certainly  in  Peru  at  the  time,  leading  a wild 
unsettled  life.  Padre  Simon  mentions  that  he  fled  from  Cuzco  to  escape 
from  the  consequences  of  a crime  he  had  committed  there,  and  it  is 
incidentally  mentioned  that  the  murderer  of  Esquivel  was  a short  man, 
which  agrees  with  the  description  of  Aguirre,  given  by  Simon. 


AGUIRRE  THE  TRAITOR. 


237 


proper ; so  they  scattered  themselves  about  Tierra  Firma, 
sowing  the  seeds  of  mutinies  and  rebellions. 

To  arrest  such  a state  of  things  the  king,  when  he  was 
informed  thereof,  sent  decrees  in  the  following  year,  1562, 
from  Madrid  to  all  the  provinces  of  these  Indies,  to  arrest 
all  the  Maranones,  wherever  they  were  found,  and  to  send 
them  to  Spain.  However,  none  arrived  there,  for  they  fled, 
or  otherwise  evaded  the  royal  mandate.  But  not  all  of 
them ; for  in  the  city  of  Merida,  Pedro  Sanchez  Paniagua 
was  taken  prisoner  and  quartered,  as  one  of  the  worst  of 
the  Maranones.  The  same  was  done  to  Anton  Llamoso, 
the  only  one  who  did  not  desert  Aguirre,  by  captain  Ortun 
Velasco,  in  the  city  of  Pamplona,  the  said  Velasco  being 
the  chief  justice.1 

The  Royal  Audience  of  Santa  Fe  was  not  behind  in 
issuing  orders  to  arrest  these  Maranones,  as  I was  well 
informed  in  the  city  of  Santa  Fe,  by  Francisco  de  Santiago, 
knight  of  the  habit  of  Christ ; and  they  succeeded  in  laying 
hands  on  Francisco  de  Carrion,  the  alguazil  mayor  of  the 
traitor  ; Roberto  de  Susaya,  his  captain  of  the  guard  ; cap- 
tain Diego  Tirado,  Garcia  de  Chaves,  Diego  Sanchez  de 
Balboa,  and  one  Portuguese.  All  these  were  on  their  way 
to  Piru.  They  were  punished  in  such  a manner,  that 
neither  they,  nor  the  rest  of  the  Maranones,  escaped  the 
hands  of  justice  ; thus  no  one  dared  to  commence  new  rebel- 
lions, for  we  have  not  seen  any  others  (through  the  goodness 
of  God),  in  these  Indies,  of  any  consequence,  since  the  time 
of  the  “ Tyrant”  Aguirre. 

1 Castellanos  remarks  that  Llamoso  was  the  murderer  of  the  lady  Inez 
de  Atienza,  and  that  he  was  put  to  death  in  Pampluna,  a city  founded 
by  Pedro  de  Ursua,  the  knight  whom  she  had  loved  so  faithfully. 
Ortun  de  Yelasco  had  been  the  comrade  of  Ursua  when  he  founded 
Pampluna,  and,  when  Ursua  departed  in  1550,  Yelasco  continued  to 
govern  that  town  for  twenty  years. 


FINIS. 


GETTY  RESEARCH  INSTITUTE 


3 3125  01378  2905 