CHAP.  I. 

1 . Gives  a brief  account  of  the  deeds  of  Pedro  de  Ursua , before  his 
arrival  in  Peru  ; and  of  his  entrance  into  that  country. — 2.  Certain 
Brazilian  Indians  give  information  in  Peru , of  very  rich  provinces 
near  the  river  Marahon. — 3.  The  Marquis  of  Cahete  determines  to 
send  Pedro  de  Ursua  to  explore  them , and  summons  him  to  his 
presence. — 4.  Various  opinions  are  formed  in  Peru  respecting  this 
expedition. 

1.  The  Captain  Pedro  de  Ursua  entered  the  city  of  Santa 
Fe,  in  the  New  Kingdom  of  Granada,  with  his  uncle  the 
licentiate  Miguel  Diaz  de  Armendariz,  the  first  Juez  de  Resi- 
dencia,  who  arrived  there  after  the  discovery  of  the  kingdom, 
and  settlement  of  the  city.1  This  Pedro  de  Ursua  was  a 
native  of  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  and  of  a town  called 
Ursua,  near  the  noble  city  of  Pampluna.  From  Santa  Fe  he 
went  down  to  settle  in  the  town  of  Pampluna,  in  New 
Granada,  and  thence  undertook  the  conquest  of  the  Musos 
Indians,  and  founded  the  city  ofTudela  amongst  them.  He 
afterwards  went  to  Santa  Martha,  and  there  performed  deeds 
worthy  of  his  noble  descent.  From  thence,  having  returned 

EXPEDITION  OF 

to  Santa  Fe,  to  give  an  account  of  what  he  had  done,  he 
descended  the  great  river1  to  Carthagena,  intending  to  go  to 
Peru  by  way  of  Panama.  In  the  execution  of  this  design 
he  reached  that  city  at  a time  when  it  was  harassed  by  the 
incursions  which  certain  negro  Cimarrones2  made  almost 
every  day.  The  people  of  Panama,  having  heard  long  be- 
fore of  his  valorous  deeds,  and  of  the  conquests  with  which 
he  had  been  charged ; entrusted  to  him  the  pacification  of 
their  land,  and  the  punishment  of  these  revolted  negroes. 
Having  acquitted  himself  well  in  this  undertaking,  he  con- 
tinued his  voyage  to  Peru,  in  search  of  more  important 
work  than  he  had  yet  been  entrusted  with ; and  arrived  at 
the  city  of  Lima  in  the  year  1558 ; Don  Andres  Hurtado  de 
Mendoza,  Marquis  of  Canete  (worthy  of  eternal  memory) 
being  then  viceroy  of  that  city. 

2.  Certain  rumours  prevailed  in  those  times,  both  in  the 
city  of  Lima  and  throughout  the  provinces  of  Peru  (which 
had  been  spread  by  Indians  from  Brazil),  respecting  rich 
provinces,  which  they  had  seen,  as  they  said,  when  on 
their  road  from  the  coast  of  Brazil,  whence  more  than  2,000 
Indians  had  set  out,  with  the  intention  of  settling  in  other 
lands,  which  might  be  more  agreeable  to  them,  as  their  own 
were  too  crowded.  Others  declare  that  the  Indians  set  out 
on  this  expedition  to  enjoy  human  food  in  those  parts  At 
length,  after  travelling  for  ten  years  with  two  Portuguese  in 
their  company,  some  by  the  river  Marahon,  and  some  by 
land,  they  reached  the  provinces  of  the  Motilones3 4  in  Peru, 
by  way  of  a famous  river1  which  flows  thence,  and  enters  the 
Marahon.  These  Indians  brought  news  respecting  the 

provinces  of  the  Omaguas,1  mentioned  also  by  Captain 
Francisco  de  Orellana,  when  he  descended  this  river  Mara- 
non  after  deserting  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  in  the  Cinnamon 
country.2 

In  these  provinces,  of  which  the  Indians  spoke  when  they 
reached  Peru,  dwelt  the  gilded  man,  at  least  this  name  was 
spread  about  in  the  land,  taking  its  origin  in  the  city  of 
Quito.  It  so  excited  the  minds  of  those  restless  spirits  with 
whom  Peru  was  full,  and  who  were  ever  ready  to  credit 
these  rumours,  that  the  viceroy  thought  it  prudent  to  seek 
some  way  by  which  to  give  employment  to  so  large  a body 
of  turbulent  men. 

3.  Being  aware  of  the  talent  of  Pedro  de  Ursua,  the  Mar- 
quis thought  he  had  found  the  proper  man  to  command  the 
contemplated  expedition,  which  he  intended  to  send  on 
this  discovery,  and  thus  Ursua  might  add  to  the  services 
which  he  had  performed  for  his  Majesty,  especially  in  the 
pacification  of  the  Negroes.  The  Marquis  also  hoped  to 
relieve  the  provinces  of  Peru  of  much  corrupt  blood,  by 
sending  forth  many  idle  people,  who  might  otherwise  cause 
some  fresh  insurrection,  like  those  which  had  already  placed 
this  famous  kingdom  in  danger  ; an  object  which  ought  al- 
ways to  be  kept  in  view  by  those  who  govern,  if  they  would 
avoid  the  lamentable  occurrences  which  had  formerly  taken 
place.  The  Viceroy,  being  determined  to  give  the  command 
of  this  expedition  to  Pedro  de  Ursua,  gave  him  the  title  of 
Governor  of  the  Provinces  which  he  might  discover  and  con- 
quer, with  power  to  appoint  officers,  and  to  reward  his  com- 
panions according  to  their  merits,  recommending  him  to 
have  a care  of  the  conquered  Indians,  to  form  settlements 
consisting  of  such  Spaniards  as  he  might  think  proper,  and 
to  do  this  for  the  good  of  the  church  and  the  crown  of  Spain. 


He  was  promised,  after  having  founded  such  settlements, 
that  he  should  be  rewarded  as  the  kings  of  Spain  were 
accustomed  to  reward  those  who  had  discovered  and  settled 
new  lands. 

4.  The  voice  of  fame  soon  spread  the  news  of  this  expedi- 
tion throughout  Peru,  and  many  offered  themselves  ; but 
there  were  others  unfavourable  to  it,  of  low  as  well  as  of  high 
degree,  who  questioned  the  propriety  of  the  conduct  of  the 
Marquis  in  patronizing  it,  as  well  as  in  entrusting  Pedro  de 
Ursua  with  the  command ; some  hoping  to  stop  the  expe- 
dition for  particular  ends  of  their  own,  others  on  account  of 
their  envious  spirit  and  idle  disposition,  wishing  to  prevent 
the  accomplishment  of  great  undertakings.  They  said  that  this 
was  not  the  moment  for  the  Viceroy  to  enter  upon  so  large 
an  affair,  the  result  of  which  would  not  be  seen  during  his 
period  of  office,  as  there  was  information  that  he  was  soon  to 
have  a successor  in  Don  Diego  de  Azuedo,  (and  it  was  said 
that  the  Marquis  was  in  no  way  pleased  that  the  King  was 
about  to  remove  him,  in  anticipation  of  his  period  of  ser- 
vice). Such  being  the  case,  Azuedo  would  find  it  most  in- 
convenient, when  he  came  to  discover  that  the  Marquis  had 
taken  a large  sum  of  money  from  the  treasury  to  defray  the 
expense  of  the  expedition,  and  in  the  hope  also  of  benefiting 
himself.  To  these  remarks  others  were  added,  having  no 
foundation,  but  which,  coming  to  the  ears  of  the  Viceroy, 
were  expected  to  have  the  effect  of  cooling,  in  some  degree, 
his  ardour  in  favouring  Pedro  de  Ursua.  These  observa- 
tions had  some  weight  with  the  Viceroy,  until  news  arrived 
that  Don  Diego  de  Azuedo  had  died  in  Seville.  The  Mar- 
quis then  became  anxious  for  the  departure  of  the  expedition, 
and  also  to  reanimate  Pedro  de  Ursua,  who  began  to  fear 
whether  he  could  successfully  conduct  so  important  an  en- 
terprize,  for  his  most  intimate  friends  had  represented  to 
him  the  great  difficulties  that  would  arise.  These  were  so 
many  presages  of  the  unfortunate  end  of  the  expedition. 


CHAP.  II. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  builds  the  brigantines  for  the  expedition,  and  makes 
Pedro  Ramiro  his  lieutenant-general. — 2.  Ursua  leaves  Lima  with 
his  people — he  arrives  at  the  town  of  Moyobamba} — 3.  How  he  con- 
trived to  obtain  two  thousand  dollars  from  the  cura  or  priest  of  this 
place. — 4.  Ursua  sends  part  of  his  people  from  the  Motilones  to 
other  provinces,  where  they  provide  for  themselves. 

1.  While  captains  were  sent  to  hunt  up  people  for  the 
expedition  in  the  vicinity  of  Lima,  early  in  1559,  so  that 
they  might  not  be  detained  for  want  of  means  to  navigate 
the  rivers,  Ursua  proposed  to  construct  vessels.  For  this 
purpose  he  looked  out  for  ship-builders,  and  found  twenty- 
five,  also  ten  negro  carpenters  ; and,  having  manufactured 
tools  and  other  requisites,  he  went  to  the  country  of  the 
Motilones,  whence,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  Brazilians 
had  come,  who  had  given  the  information  which  had  been 
the  cause  of  the  expedition. 

In  this  province  there  was  a Spanish  town  called  Santa 
Cruz  de  Capacoba,2  lately  founded  by  Captain  Pedro  Ramiro, 
who  was  governing  there  in  the  name  of  the  king. 

Pedro  de  Ursua  arrived  here  with  his  people,  and  having 
ascertained  on  which  part  of  the  banks  he  could  cut  good 
timber,  he  went  down  the  river  some  twenty  leagues,  and 
reached  the  desired  spot ; and  having  given  orders  to  his 
officers,  among  whom  was  Juan  Corzo,  his  principal  ship- 
wright, to  build  the  number  of  vessels  he  required,  and 
named  Pedro  Ramiro  as  his  Lieutenant-General,  Ursua  re- 
turned to  Lima,  from  which  place  he  could  dispatch  the 
people  and  soldiers  collected  by  his  captains. 

2.  The  funds  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  were  very  scanty;  and 
although  the  Viceroy  had  assisted  him  from  the  royal  trea- 

sury,  and  money  had  been  obtained  from  other  sources, 
he  had  not  sufficient  for  his  expenses.  This  caused  nearly 
a year’s  delay,  which  would  have  continued  longer,  if  the 
people  of  Lima,  and  others  favourable  to  Ursua’s  views,  had 
not  supplied  him  with  more  money  for  the  equipment  of 
his  soldiers,  purchase  of  powder,  rope,  muskets,  horses,  arms 
and  munitions,  cattle,  ship -provisions,  and  other  things. 

At  last  Ursua  left  Lima,  having  sent  on  the  greater  num- 
ber of  his  people,  as  a vanguard,  and  to  watch  that  none 
deserted.  He  arrived  at  Moyobamba,  where  Pedro  Portillo, 
the  priest,  had  hoarded  five  or  six  thousand  dollars.  Portillo, 
hearing  flattering  accounts  of  Ursua’s  expedition,  and  seeing 
the  great  number  of  gallant  followers,  anxious  also  to  in- 
crease his  fortune  and  dignity,  by  becoming  a bishop  in  the 
new  lands  to  be  discovered,  offered  to  lend  Ursua  two  thou- 
sand dollars,  on  condition  that  he  would  promise  to  appoint 
him  cura  and  vicar  of  the  expedition.  Ursua  gladly  accepted 
the  cura’s  proposal,  and  felt  no  difficulty  in  acceding  to  Por- 
tillo’s wishes  for  ecclesiastical  preferment. 

3.  But  the  priest  soon  repented  his  offer,  and  began  to 
feel  but  little  faith  in  the  success  of  the  expedition.  He  in- 
timated that  the  loan  of  the  two  thousand  dollars  would  be 
inconvenient  to  him;  but  Ursua  could  not  do  without 
money,  for  he  had  ordered  many  articles  for  which  it  was 
necessary  to  pay.  Ursua,  finding  himself  in  an  awkward 
position,  called  into  his  councils  Juan  de  Vargas,  who  was 
afterwards  his  lieutenant,  Fernando  de  Guzman,  Juan  Alonso 
dela  Vandera,  Pedro  Alonzo  Casco,  and  Pedro  de  Miranda, 
a mulatto,  all  fighting  men  and  of  elastic  consciences ; tell- 
ing them  his  present  trouble,  and  that  he  was  most  desirous 
that  the  money  should  be  obtained  from  the  priest.  His 
friends  saw  no  difficulty  about  the  matter,  even  if  a little 
violence  was  resorted  to ; — so  one  night  they  reported  that 
Juan  de  Vargas  (who  was  then  quartered  in  the  church  on 
account  of  two  wounds),  was  dying,  and  one  of  them  went 

for  the  cura  Portillo,  urging  him  to  lose  no  time  in  going  to 
confess  Vargas.  On  leaving  his  house  the  cura  was  seized 
by  Ursua’s  friends,  and  was  forced  to  sign  an  order  for  two 
thousand  dollars  on  a merchant  of  the  town,  who  was  the 
keeper  of  the  cura’s  wealth.  The  cura  went  to  Vargas,  who 
was  in  an  apartment  of  the  church.  On  his  arrival  fire-arms 
were  pointed  at  his  breast,  and,  without  waiting  for  the 
morrow,  they  took  him  to  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Capa- 
coba.  Here  the  greater  portion  of  the  expedition  was  en- 
camped. At  this  place  they  forced  from  him  the  other 
three  or  four  thousand  dollars  of  his  fortune.  This  system 
of  things  did  not  stop  here ; for  during  the  progress  of  the 
expedition  there  was  much  disturbance,  and  the  turbulent 
paid  for  their  misdeeds  by  terrible  deaths,  as  we  shall  see 
further  on. 

4.  The  chief  part  of  the  expedition  had  reached  the  town 
of  the  Motilones  of  Santa  Cruz,  when  the  Governor  Pedro 
de  Ursua  arrived,  (he  already  took  this  title,  without  know- 
ing where  the  country  lay  that  he  was  to  be  governor  of), 
and  although  this  province  was  fertile,  and  aided  much  in  the 
support  of  the  people,  yet  as  they  were  many,  the  governor 
found  it  necessary  to  send  a portion  of  his  followers  to  a pro- 
vince called  Tubalosas,  not  far  distant,  to  remain  and  provide 
for  themselves  there  until  he  was  ready  to  embark;  assigning 
to  them  as  chiefs  two  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  Francisco 
Diaz  de  Arles,  who  had  been  with  him  in  all  his  actions 
since  they  left  Navarre  ; and  Diego  de  Frias,  an  attendant  of 
the  Viceroy’s,  one  who  had  been  highly  recommended  to 
him,  and  who  was  treasurer  to  the  expedition.  These  two 
had  not  been  friendly  to  the  Corregidor  Pedro  Ramiro, 
since  the  time  when  Ursua  made  Ramiro  his  lieutenant- 
general,  because  they  had  pretensions  to  the  same  post,  as 
they  gave  him  to  understand  to  his  cost.  Although  the 
governor  felt  satisfied  with  the  two  chiefs  and  soldiers,  he 
also  sent  Pedro  Ramiro,  who  knew  the  country  well,  and 


was  feared  by  the  natives.  Ramiro  was  to  go  onwards  to 
the  said  province,  to  make  the  officers  and  men  friends 
with  the  chiefs  and  people,  after  which  he  was  to  return  to 
Santa  Cruz. 


CHAP.  III. 

1.  Arles  and  Frias  are  displeased  at  having  Ramiro  with  them — they 
determine  to  kill  him. — 2.  They  kill  Ramiro. — 3.  The  governor  Ursua 
goes  in  person  to  arrest  the  delinquents. — 4.  He  sends  them  to  Santa- 
Cruz , where  they  are  beheaded. 

1.  Arles  and  Frias  were  very  much  displeased  that  Ra- 
miro had  been  named  as  their  leader,  for  they  hated  him  in 
consequence  of  his  appointment,  as  already  stated  ; but  it 
was  necessary  that  Ramiro  should  lead  the  way  for  a few 
days  on  their  journey,  after  which  they  determined  to  turn 
against  him,  and  to  carry  their  scheme  into  effect,  when 
resting  for  the  night.  The  devil  instigated  the  act  (for  no 
other  could  have  been  the  author).  The  assassins  conferred 
with  each  other,  and  the  evil  genius  who  had  inspired  them 
gave  the  means  also.  They  thought  that  on  account  of  the 
great  friendship  both  had  with  Ursua,  he  would  defend 
them,  or  look  over  any  guilty  action  they  might  commit. 
They  vacillated  only  respecting  the  manner  of  committing 
an  act  which  they  had  decided  on.  In  this  state  of  uncer- 
tainty, two  soldiers,  great  friends  of  theirs,  joined  them. 
These  men  had  separated  from  those  who  had  gone  onwards, 
and  having  missed  Arles  and  Frias,  had  returned  to  look  after 
them.  One  was  named  Grijota,  the  other  Alonso  Martin. 
They  asked  their  officers  why  they  had  left  the  lieutenant, 
who  replied  that  Ramiro  had  dismissed  them,  he  remaining 
with  the  others,  and  intending  to  rebel,  in  order  to  enter 
certain  lands  of  which  he  had  information,  and  settle  them. 


They  added  that  if  Grijota  and  Martin  would  join  them, 
they  would  be  doing  a good  service  to  the  king  and  the 
governor,  by  seizing  Ramiro,  and  so  stopping  the  progress 
of  his  rebellion. 

The  soldiers  did  not  then  see  through  the  intentions 
of  Arles  and  Frias,  which  were  well  cloaked  with  explana- 
tions, apparently  true.  They  agreed  to  join  them,  and  the 
four  continued  on  the  track  of  Ramiro  with  the  intention 
of  putting  their  design  into  execution  on  the  first  opportunity. 

2.  Having  journeyed  a few  leagues,  they  saw  Pedro  Ra- 
miro on  the  banks  of  a rapid  river,  over  which  it  had  been 
necessary  (there  being  only  one  small  canoe  for  the  passage 
of  the  river,  which  was  not  fordable)  to  pass  the  rest  of  the 
soldiers  first.  Ramiro,  who  had  only  one  companion,  the  rest 
having  passed  the  river,  saw  the  four  approach  him.  The 
four,  taking  advantage  of  the  occasion,  saluted  him  with 
bland  words,  very  different  from  the  character  of  their  in- 
tentions, and  he  felt  assured  that  they  were  friendly ; but 
they  laid  hands  upon  him  suddenly  and  disarmed  him, 
while  Pedro  de  Frias  ordered  a slave  he  had  with  him  to 
strangle  him,  which  was  done,  and  then  he  cut  his  head  off. 
The  youth  who  was  with  Ramiro  made  his  escape,  returning 
as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  town  of  the  Motilones,  and 
giving  notice  of  what  had  happened  to  Pedro  de  Ursua, 
who  was  much  distressed  at  the  news.  The  four  mur- 
derers looked  upon  themselves  as  victors,  and  the  canoe 
returning  to  the  landing  place  to  fetch  Pedro  Ramiro,  they 
entered  into  it  and  crossed  to  the  other  side,  persuading  the 
people  that  they  had  executed  Ramiro  by  order  of  the  Go- 
vernor Ursua,  in  consequence  of  his  being  informed  that 
Ramiro  designed  to  rebel  and  take  the  people  with  him. 
This  explanation  sufficed.  The  murderers  sent  one  of  their 
friends  to  Ursua  to  say  that  Captain  Pedro  Ramiro  had  been 
arrested  by  their  orders  on  the  ground  that  he  wished  to 
rebel  and  lead  the  people  with  him,  but  that  they,  as  faithful 

servants  of  the  king  and  his  governor,  had  made  him  pri- 
soner, and  would  detain  him  until  they  were  instructed  how 
to  act  further  in  the  case. 

But  the  truth  had  already  come  to  the  ears  of  the  gover- 
nor, through  the  young  man  who  had  been  with  Ramiro, 
and  he  disbelieved  the  second  messenger ; but  he  dis- 
sembled, and  gave  no  indication  that  he  suspected  Arles 
and  Frias. 

There  were  not  wanting  men,  who,  reasoning  seriously 
on  this  murder  of  Ramiro,  recommended  Ursua  to  get  all 
his  people  together  and  return  to  Peru,  particularly  as 
Arles  and  Frias  had  stated  such  to  be  their  desire. 

3.  The  Governor  was  grieved,  indeed,  at  what  had  oc- 
curred ; he  had  fears  and  suspicions  that  worse  would  sue- 
ceed,  even  a mutiny  amongst  the  soldiers  against  the  four 
murderers  of  Ramiro.  He  felt  ill  at  ease  until  he  decided 
upon  going  himself  with  a few  attendants,  thus  making  no 
show  of  power.  He  trusted  also  to  the  confidence  Arles 
and  Frias  had  in  him ; for  if  they  saw  him  come  with  a 
large  force  (fearing  the  punishment  their  crime  merited) 
they  might  mutiny,  and  instead  of  depending  on  their  safety 
by  reason  of  old  friendships,  there  might  occur  most  serious 
tumults ; thus  in  the  King’s  name,  who  was  so  justly  be- 
loved by  the  good,  and  dreaded  by  the  evil,  Ursua  unex- 
pectedly arrived  amongst  the  people  and  the  murderers,  so 
that  the  latter  had  no  time  to  tamper  with  the  soldiers 
against  the  Governor.  The  four  assassins  hurriedly  collected 
together  what  they  could,  escaping  from  the  presence  of 
the  Governor,  on  account  of  the  shame  they  felt  for  their 
great  crimes. 

Ursua  made  no  show  of  disappointment  at  not  finding  the 
murderers  ; his  plan  was  to  remain  most  tranquil.  He  sent 
to  tell  them  that  they  were  unjust  to  themselves,  being 
men  of  such  qualities  and  gifts,  in  making  themselves  cul- 
pable by  flight,  when  it  was  notorious  that  they  had  ever 

shown  themselves  diligent  in  their  services  to  the  King  ; and, 
supposing  they  had  overstepped  the  line  of  duty,  they  well 
knew  the  obligations  he  owed  them,  and  that  he  could  serve 
and  favour  them ; that  it  was  better  they  should  return  to 
the  camp,  and  so  prevent  their  falling  into  the  hands  of  any 
other  judge,  who  would  punish  them. 

4.  These  and  other  reasons  were  sufficient  to  give  confi- 
dence to  Arles  and  Frias,  and  they  determined  to  present 
themselves  before  Pedro  de  Ursua.  To  assure  them  the  more, 
he  sent  them  immediately  to  the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  and 
promised  to  do  his  best  that  they  should  be  set  at  liberty. 
The  Governor  followed  them,  after  having  put  things  in 
order  among  the  soldiers  and  people,  and  appointed  a chief 
over  them.  He  arrived  a few  days  after  the  prisoners,  at 
the  town  of  Santa  Cruz,  and  ordered  them  to  be  arrested 
and  secured  as  prisoners.  The  cause  was  tried  by  the 
assessor  of  the  expedition,  with  all  legal  form ; but  as  the 
crime  was  most  grave,  notorious,  and  conclusive,  he  con- 
demned them  to  have  their  heads  cut  off. 

Although  the  sentence  was  notified  to  them,  they  did  not 
believe  it  would  be  carried  into  execution ; for  up  to  this 
point  Ursua  had  been  bland  in  his  conduct  to  them.  They 
considered  that  the  sentence  was  only  nominal,  and  merely 
given  in  conformity  with  his  office  as  judge,  in  order  that 
he  might  be  feared  by  those  he  commanded;  and  that 
doubtless  he  would  allow  them  to  appeal  to  the  royal  au- 
dience at  Lima.  Many  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  and 
others,  being  aware  of  the  old  friendship,  and  even  relation- 
ship, between  the  culprits  and  the  judge,  thought  that  the 
condemned  would  not  suffer. 

But  the  Governor,  putting  aside  everything  but  justice, 
which  it  was  his  duty  to  administer,  without  exception  of 
persons,  even  of  his  own  blood,  and  in  order  to  make  a pro- 
per example,  commanded  that  there  should  be  no  appeal, 
and  that  their  heads  should  be  cut  off  in  public,  which  was 
done. 

CHAP.  IV. 

1.  People  in  Peru  are  fearful  of  mutiny  in  Ursua' s expedition — a 
friend  writes  to  him  on  the  subject . — 2.  The  governor  sends  two 
parties  of  soldiers  in  search  of  provisions.  One  of  these , composed  of 
thirty  men , goes  down  the  river , more  than  two  hundred  leagues. — 
3.  Garcia  del  Arze,  and  his  soldiers,  fortify  themselves  on  an  island , 
against  the  Indians. — 4.  The  Spaniards  are  most  cruel  to  the  natives 
who  come  peacefully  to  them. 

1.  The  Viceroy  and  Oidores,  as  well  as  the  inhabitants  of 
Lima,  began  to  entertain  fears  for  the  success  of  Ursua’s 
expedition,  for  there  were  in  it  so  many  mutinous  and 
turbulent  persons,  who  had  been  in  the  rebellions  of 
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  Don  Sebas- 
tian de  Castilla,  and  that  of  Contreras ; and  the  number 
of  Ursua’s  followers  was  large,  amounting  to  nearly  three 
hundred  men. 

These  suspicions  increased  daily,  and  were  countenanced 
by  idle  and  evil  intentioned  people,  until  a stop  was  put  to 
them  by  the  news  of  the  execution  of  Arles  and  Frias  by 
Pedro  de  Ursua.  The  Marquis  and  the  Oidores  then  be- 
came more  tranquil,  and  praised  the  decisive  act  of  the  ex- 
ecution, and  the  Governor’s  management,  promising  to  them- 
selves great  successes  on  account  of  the  expedition.  There 
were,  however,  some  superstitious  people  who  said  that  as 
blood  had  been  shed  at  its  commencement,  it  would  end  in 
blood. 

One  Pedro  de  Linasco,  a settler  in  Chachapoias,  and  a 
friend  of  Ursua’s,  accustomed  to  such  expeditions,  and 
well  acquainted  with  many  of  those  who  were  with  Ursua, 
wrote  him  a letter,  in  which  he  notified  to  him  the  suspicions 
of  people  in  Peru  that  many  of  his  soldiers  were  turbulent 
and  mutinous,  and  that  they  might  be  troublesome  to  him, 
and  might  even  kill  him ; that  he  should  have  especial  sus- 
picion of  Lorenzo  de  Salduendo,  Lope  de  Aguirre,  Juan 

Alonso  de  la  Bandera,  Christoval  de  Chaves,  a certain 
Don  Martin,  and  others  whom  he  named,  telling  him 
that  for  ten  or  twelve  men  more  or  less  he  was  not  to  give 
up  his  journey,  and  he  prayed  him  to  separate  those  he  had 
named  from  being  his  followers.  Even  should  he  have  com- 
passion on  them  in  consequence  of  their  poverty,  such  feel- 
ings should  have  no  weight  with  him  ; that  Ursua  should  send 
them  to  him,  and  he  would  take  care  of  them  until  the  Go- 
vernor should  discover  the  lands  he  was  in  search  of,  and 
when  he  thought  it  opportune,  he  could  send  for  them,  and 
do  with  them  as  he  thought  best. 

He  begged  of  him,  as  a friend,  not  to  take  Doha  Inez  de 
Atienza  with  him,  who  was  the  daughter  of  one  Bias  de 
Atienza,  an  inhabitant  of  the  city  of  Trujillo,  and  widow  of 
Pedro  de  Arcos,  an  inhabitant  of  Piura.  Ursua  had  taken 
her,  with  the  intention  of  marrying  her,  as  she  was  a spirited 
and  beautiful  woman.  Linasco  said  that  it  did  not  look  well, 
and  that  it  was  setting  a bad  example  to  his  followers  ; that 
greater  evils  would  succeed  than  he  could  possibly  suppose  ; 
and  that  if  he  determined  to  leave  her,  he  would  give  orders 
that  she  should  be  taken  care  of ; and  this  should  be  done 
in  such  a way  that  Doha  Inez  should  not  know  who  had 
been  the  cause  of  her  remaining  behind,  or  that  Ursua  had 
even  consented  to  it.  This  friendly  letter  had  not  the  de- 
sired effect  on  the  governor  ; who,  although  a man  of  great 
ability,  was  young,  and  without  much  experience.  Thus 
he  did  not  follow  the  advice  of  his  friend,  excepting  that  he 
sent  back  Don  Martin ; neither  did  he  reply  to  the  letter, 
or  do  what  was  advised  therein.  Had  he  done  so  he  might 
have  been  saved  from  death  by  the  hands  of  those  whose 
names  had  been  given  to  him. 

2.  Pedro  de  Ursua,  being  now  in  the  town  of  Moti- 
lones  or  Santa  Cruz,  and  all  his  people  having  arrived,  sent 
one  hundred  men  under  Captain  Juan  Vargas  by  land,  so  that 
on  their  arrival  at  the  river  Cocama,1  they  might  go  up  it 

with  all  the  provisions  they  might  have  collected  in  the 
districts  they  had  passed  through,  deposit  them  at  the 
mouth  of  the  river,  and  await  the  General’s  arrival  with 
the  rest  of  the  people. 

Ursua  likewise  sent  one  Garcia  del  Arze,  a confidential 
friend,  with  thirty  men,  to  a province  twenty  leagues  down 
the  river  where  the  vessels  were  building,  called  Cape- 
ruzos  (on  account  of  a sort  of  hood  worn  by  the  natives), 
that  he  might  collect  provisions,  deposit  them  on  the  mar- 
gin of  the  river,  and  await  the  arrival  of  Captain  Juan  de 
Vargas.  Both  were  to  stop  for  Ursua,  so  that  the  whole  of 
the  expedition  might  go  together  down  the  river.  Garcia 
del  Arze  started  with  his  thirty  companions  on  a raft,  and 
some  canoes,  from  the  place  where  the  vessels  were  being 
built,  but,  from  some  cause  or  other,  he  did  not  wait  for 
Juan  de  Vargas  as  he  had  been  ordered  ; so,  having  collected 
some  provisions  in  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos,  and  from 
other  localities,  he  descended  the  river  for  two  hundred 
leagues,  and  having  suffered  much  from  hunger,  and  en- 
countered great  difficulties  and  risks,  he  arrived  at  a plea- 
sant island  in  the  river,  which  was  named  after  him  the 
island  of  Garcia. 

Among  other  misfortunes  that  occurred  during  the  voy- 
age, was  the  loss  of  two  of  his  soldiers  who  went  on  shore  in 
search  of  food  ; they  entered  a deep  forest,  but  went  so  far 
as  not  to  be  able  to  retrace  their  steps,  and  were  left  behind. 
Such  was  the  scarcity  of  food  that  the  party  could  not  re- 
main long  in  one  place,  and  they  were  obliged  to  eat  small 
alligators,  which  Arze  shot  with  his  arquebuse,  in  the  use  of 
which  he  was  very  dexterous. 

3.  Having  arrived  at  the  island  (inhabited  by  warlike 
natives)  they  found  some  food,  and  for  this  reason  com- 
menced (in  case  the  arrival  of  Pedro  de  Ursua  with  his 
people  should  be  delayed),  to  fortify  a convenient  spot,  with 
thick  posts,  so  as  to  defend  themselves  from  the  continual 


assaults  of  the  Indians  from  the  land, as  well  as  from  the  river. 
These  were  in  such  numbers  that  had  heaven  not  most 
miraculously  guarded  the  Spaniards,  they  must  have  been 
overpowered,  being  only  thirty  in  number,  and  badly  found 
in  offensive  and  defensive  arms,  for  they  only  had  two  or 
three  muskets,  whilst  the  Indians  numbered  from  two  to 
three  thousand ; nevertheless  the  few  arquebuses  were  suf- 
ficient, seeing  what  havoc  they  made  among  the  natives. 
All  their  shot  being  expended,  Garcia  del  Arze  fired  the 
ramrod  from  his  canribn  at  the  principal  canoe,  full  of  In- 
dians, and  although  they  made  a fierce  assault,  the  Indians 
were  routed,  and  nearly  the  whole  of  them  fell  into  the 
water ; those  who  remained  alive  being  terrified  at  the 
sight  of  the  wounded. 

On  another  occasion,  when  they  were  hard  pressed,  they 
struck  down  six  Indians,  who  suffered  more  from  being 
naked ; but  this  was  the  last  time  they  came  to  annoy  them 
with  their  attacks.  The  Indians  now  considered  it  prudent 
to  make  peace  with  the  Spaniards,  so  one  day  a number  of 
them  presented  themselves,  bringing  food,  and  showing 
signs  of  friendship. 

4.  The  Spaniards  were  suspicious  of  these  signs  of  friend- 
ship, and  thought  that  the  Indians  meditated  treason,  so 
they  determined  to  lay  hands  on  them,  and,  putting  them 
into  a hut  within  the  stockade  (nearly  twenty  in  number) 
they  killed  them  with  their  daggers  and  swords. 

The  news  of  the  cruelties  of  the  Spaniards  w^as  soon 
spread  around,  so  that  at  the  mere  mention  of  their  name 
the  natives  trembled  ; they  fled  from  their  habitations,  leav- 
ing everything  behind,  when  they  knew  that  the  soldiery 
were  in  search  of  them.  Thus  it  was  that  thirty  persons 
were  able  to  maintain  their  position  on  this  island  for  three 
months,  before  Pedro  de  Ursua  joined  them. 

CHAP.  Y. 

1.  Juan  de  Vargas  commences  his  voyage — arrives  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Cocctma. — 2.  He  remains  here  until  Ursua  arrives. — 3.  The 
brigantines  spring  a leak  when  launched , which  is  unfortunate  for 
the  expedition. — 4.  Ursua  descends  the  river  with  all  his  people , 
arriving  at  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos. — 5.  He  sends  a 
brigantine  to  advise  Juan  de  Vargas  of  his  coming. 

1.  A few  days  after  Garcia  del  Arze  left  the  town  of  the 
Motilones,  Juan  de  Vargas  sailed  with  his  people  in  one  of 
the  brigantines,  and  some  canoes,  down  the  river,  on  the  1st 
of  July,  1560,  to  the  province  of  the  Caperuzos,  whence  he 
soon  passed  onwards,  not  finding  Garcia  del  Arze  there. 
Supposing  he  would  be  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  Co- 
cama,1  as  had  been  arranged,  Vargas  continued  his  course 
down  the  river  to  the  mouth  of  the  Cocama,  and  not  finding 
Arze  there,  he  followed  his  orders  to  ascend  this  river  in 
search  of  provisions,  which  he  did  in  his  canoes,  leaving 
the  more  sickly  soldiers  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  in  charge 
of  the  brigantine. 

They  were  twenty-two  days  ascending  the  river  without 
meeting  with  habitations  where  they  could  obtain  what  they 
sought ; after  which  they  fell  in  with  some  native  villages, 
where  they  found  abundance  of  maize.  From  thence  they 
took  many  native  men  and  women  as  servants  for  the  expe- 
dition, as  well  as  canoes  laden  with  maize.  Vargas  now 
descended  the  river  to  its  mouth,  where  he  found  the  people 
of  the  brigantine  suffering  much  from  hunger  and  the  effects 
of  the  climate,  of  which  three  Spaniards  had  died,  also 
many  native  men  and  women  who  were  with  them. 

2.  The  arrival  of  Don  Juan  was  hailed  with  joy,  for  he 
brought  the  remedy  against  so  fearful  an  enemy  as  hunger ; 
but  this  great  benefit  was  soon  forgotten,  for  the  soldiers, 
during  the  two  long  months  they  had  been  detained  here 

without  occupation,  waiting  for  the  general,  considered  that 
the  delay  of  Ursua  was  inexcusable,  and  began  to  plan  how 
to  leave  this  spot,  which  they  called  the  sweet  sea. 

There  were  two  opinions  or  plans  respecting  a mutiny : 
one,  (and  the  greater  number  were  of  this  way  of  think- 
ing,) was  to  kill  Juan  de  Vargas  and  return  to  Peru  up  the 
river  Cocama ; the  other  was  to  abandon  Vargas  and  go 
on  new  discoveries.  However,  neither  of  these  plans  was 
carried  into  effect,  for  they  were  very  slow  about  the  matter; 
but  they  were  so  secret,  that  it  was  a long  time  afterwards 
before  it  came  to  the  ears  of  Don  Juan,  and  then  it  was 
too  late  to  punish  the  mutineers.  The  spirit  of  dissatis- 
faction ceased  with  the  arrival  of  Pedro  Galeas  and  some 
soldiers,  and  then  came  General  Ursua  with  the  rest  of  the 
party. 

S.  Ursua,  during  his  stay  in  the  town  of  the  Motilones 
or  Santa  Cruz,  understood  how  to  gain  people  to  his  side ; 
and  its  inhabitants  were  won  over  to  follow  him,  leaving 
their  comforts  behind.  He  promised  to  reward  them  largely 
for  their  co-operation,  in  the  countries  which  might  be  disco- 
vered. The  entire  population  joined  him,  taking  their  cattle 
and  property  with  them. 

Ursua  having  now  collected  his  party,  the  vessels  were 
made  ready ; but  on  launching  them,  as  the  timbers  they 
were  built  of  had  not  been  seasoned,  most  of  them  sprang 
leaks  and  were  of  but  little  use,  excepting  one  brigantine 
and  three  flat-bottomed  boats.  This  circumstance  caused  a 
long  detention,  for  they  had  to  build  canoes  and  rafts  to 
hold  the  people ; the  spot  also  was  inconvenient,  provisions 
were  scarce,  and  time  was  an  object.  The  expedition  could 
not  remain  to  make  proper  arrangements  for  the  people  and 
sailors,  or  for  the  transport  of  cattle,  and  the  greater  portion 
were  left  behind  at  the  ship-yard  with  luggage  and  warlike 
stores.  Of  three  hundred  horses,  room  could  only  be  found 
for  forty,  and  of  the  cattle  but  for  few,  the  rest  remaining  to 


run  wild  and  without  owners.  The  people  were  in  such  a 
state  of  ill-humour  that  they  almost  mutinied,  and  wished 
to  return  to  Peru,  so  as  to  save  what  they  had  there ; 
and  this  they  would  have  done  had  not  the  governor,  by  his 
dexterous  proceedings,  arresting  some,  flattering  and  dissem- 
bling to  others,  warning  and  blandly  admonishing  the  whole, 
put  plainly  before  them  the  misery  they  would  experience 
should  they  remain  behind  ; adding  that  on  the  contrary, 
by  going  onwards  there  was  hope  of  fortune,  and  the  glory 
of  being  in  such  an  expedition.  He  added  to  this,  that  he 
wished  them  fully  to  understand  that  his  sorrow  at  parting 
with  them  would  be  greater  than  theirs  at  leaving  him ; 
still  as  a governor  he  felt  it  was  his  duty  to  do  his  best  in 
satisfying  all  of  them,  and  that  God  would  take  them  safely 
to  the  land  whither  their  chief  promised  to  lead  them. 

4.  These  reflections  had  the  desired  effect,  and  no  one  left 
him.  He  embarked  the  people  in  the  brigantine,  canoes, 
and  flat-bottomed  boats,  on  the  26th  of  September,  1560, 
steering  down  the  river.  But  the  people  were  far  from  being 
comforted  for  the  loss  of  their  cattle,  and  the  other  things 
they  could  not  take  with  them,  and  they  feared  the  risks 
they  would  run  in  the  narrow  parts  of  the  river,  and  the 
dangerous  state  of  the  vessels  they  were  in.  The  size  of  the 
river  also  alarmed  them,  lest  they  should  encounter  a storm, 
in  which  they  might  all  be  lost  ere  they  could  gain  the 
shore. 

On  the  second  day  of  the  voyage  they  lost  sight  of  the 
mountains  and  came  into  a flat  country,  and  henceforth  the 
country  continued  to  be  flat  until  they  reached  the  coast  of 
the  north  sea. 

On  the  third  day  the  brigantine  ran  on  a bank,  when 
she  carried  away  a part  of  her  keel ; and  her  cargo  would 
have  been  lost,  had  not  the  men  stuffed  their  clothes  and  wool 
into  the  hole.  They  got  the  vessel  on  shore  and  repaired 
her.  The  voyage  was  then  continued  to  the  Province  of 


Caperuzos,  where  they  found  Lorenzo  Salduendo,  who  had 
been  sent  forward  two  or  three  days  before,  in  floats  and 
canoes  with  some  soldiers,  to  collect  food  and  have  it  ready. 

5.  The  governor  was  detained  here  two  days,  awaiting  the 
brigantine,  which  arrived,  after  encountering  many  difficul- 
ties, owing  to  her  leaky  state.  There  was  fear  that  the  cargo 
would  have  to  be  left  behind,  as  it  was  difficult  to  store  it, 
but,  having  done  this  after  two  days’  work,  and  the  pro- 
visions being  divided  among  all  the  people  that  Salduendo 
had  collected,  the  governor  ordered  the  brigantine  to  proceed 
with  all  on  board,  under  the  command  of  Pedro  Alonso 
Galeas,  with  instructions  that,  having  arrived  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Cocama,  he  should  inform  Juan  de  Yargas,  that 
although  the  Governor  might  be  delayed  somewhat,  he 
was  on  his  road  to  join  him,  and  that  Yargas  should  at 
all  events  await  his  coming ; for  Ursua  was  doubtless  aware 
that  Yargas  was  not  well  pleased  with  his  long  detention 
there. 

The  brigantine  got  under  weigh,  and,  arriving  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Cocama,  found  Don  Juan  and  his  men.  The 
arrival  of  the  brigantine  caused  general  content,  which 
was  increased  by  the  news  that  Ursua  would  shortly  follow, 
which  he  did.  He  slept  on  shore  during  the  nights,  fear- 
ing the  navigation  of  the  river  in  the  dark  on  account  of 
banks,  floating  trees,  falls,  and  other  obstructions ; and 
finally  they  arrived  at  a river  which  joins  its  waters  with 
those  of  the  Motilones,  and  is  called  Bracamoros,  its  head 
waters  being  near  the  Motilones,  in  a province  called  Gua- 
nuco.  It  is  named  Bracamoros,  because  it  commences  to  run 
with  some  force  in  a province  of  that  name  (having  pre- 
viously received  many  smaller  streams)  near  old  Guanuco, 
between  Caxamalca  and  Chachapoyas.  It  continues  to  have 
its  powerful  body  of  water  increased  by  the  many  branches 
running  into  it,  so  that  when  it  enters  into  that  of  the  Mo- 
tilones it  has  doubled  its  size.  These  two  rivers  meet  one 

hundred  and  fifty  leagues  below  the  place  where  the  brigan- 
tines were  built,  both  having  previously  run  a course  of 
thirty  leagues  from  their  sources.1 


CHAP.  VI. 

1.  From  the  river  Bracamoros,  the  Governor  continues  his  voyage  to  that 
of  Cocdma , where  he  finds  Juan  de  Vargas  with  his  party. — 2.  They 
continue  their  voyage , some  of  their  necessities  in  the  way  of  food 
being  supplied  by  the  Ilicoteas , and  their  eggs. — 3.  They  arrive 
at  the  island  where  Garcia  del  Arze  and  his  soldiers  are. — 4.  They 
find  some  islands  loioer  down  the  river , with  villages , but  no  inhabi- 
tants, for  they  had  abandoned  them. 

1.  The  governor,  being  detained  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Bracamoros,2  had  sufficient  time  to  go  up  it  in  search  of 
provisions ; but  on  examination  it  was  found  that  even 
higher  up  the  shores  were  uninhabited.  He  therefore  con- 
tinued his  course  for  a hundred  leagues,  arriving  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Cocama,3  where  they  found  Juan  de  Vargas  and 
his  party,  short  of  provisions,  in  consequence  of  the  length  of 
time  they  had  been  waiting  for  the  governor.  They  were  all 
joyous  at  the  meeting,  and,  the  newly  arrived  party  having 
rested  eight  days,  the  expedition  left  that  spot,  with  some 
apprehensions  at  not  having  fallen  in  with  Garcia  del  Arze, 
or  heard  any  tidings  of  him. 

At  a short  distance,  as  they  were  leaving  the  mouth  of  this 

river,  the  brigantine  that  had  brought  Vargas,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  rottenness  of  its  timbers,  began  to  break  up, 
and  became  useless.  This  obliged  them  to  distribute  the 
crew  and  cargo  amongst  the  canoes  and  boats,  which, 
being  overloaded,  were  in  great  danger,  the  more  particu- 
larly as  they  were  in  so  large  a river.  The  river  was  swelled 
by  the  waters  of  the  Motilones,  Bracamoros,  and  Cocama, 
whose  sources,  according  to  some,  are  the  rivers  Aporima 
(Apurimac),  Mancai  (Abancay?),  Nauca,  Vilcas,  Parios, 
and  Jauja,  and  many  more.  Others  say  that  this  great 
river  rises  behind  Chinchacocha,  to  the  east  of  the  Province 
of  Guanuco,  passing  by  the  towns  of  Paucartambo  and  Gua- 
cabamba,  and  uniting  with  rivers  which  come  from  Tarama 
(Tarma?)  and  also  with  many  others  from  the  mountains 
of  that  district,  as  well  as  with  those  that  were  seen  and 
passed  by  the  governor  Gomes  Arias,  in  what  is  called 
Pupanapa  (Bumipampa  ?).  However  this  may  be,  the  river 
of  Cocama,1  which  they  were  navigating,  is  formed  by  all 
these.  It  is  one  of  the  most  celebrated  rivers  in  the  world 
that  has  been  discovered  by  man  up  to  the  present  time 
in  this  region,  and  navigated  by  our  Conquistadores  ; for 
when  it  enters  the  sea,  it  is  without  doubt  the  largest  that 
is  known,  and  leaves  the  Danube,  the  Nile,  the  Ganges,  and 
the  Plata  far  behind,  as  well  as  other  rivers,  celebrated  in 
ancient  and  modern  times. 

2.  This  river  abounds  in  various  species  of  fish  great  and 
small,  also  great  numbers  of  birds  are  on  its  shores,  which 
feed  on  the  fish.  There  are  many  hicoteas  and  turtle,  the 
eggs  of  which  are  laid  in  large  spaces  on  the  sandy  shores, 
where  the  turtle  cover  them  up  under  the  sand,  and  the 
great  heat  of  the  sun  hatches  them  in  due  time.2  The  young 

go  into  the  water,  as  a stone  when  thrown  goes  to  its  centre 
(admirable  provision  of  nature) ; these  animals  are  not  vivi- 
parous, but  oviparous ; and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
cay  manes  (alligators),  which  have  similar  habits.  These 
animals  afforded  food  for  the  people. 

After  six  days’  navigation  down  the  river,  from  the  mouth 
of  the  Cocama,  they  fell  in  with  another  river  on  the  right, 
where  some  Indians  were  fishing,  who,  on  seeing  the  expe- 
dition, left  their  nets  and  fish,  and  ran  into  the  thick  wood, 
with  such  celerity  that  none  of  them  were  caught,  although 
they  were  followed ; but  their  canoes  were  taken  and  all 
that  was  in  them,  with  more  than  a hundred  turtle  and 
hicoteas,  also  many  eggs,  which  gave  much  sustenance  to 
the  people,  who  were  but  badly  victualled. 

S.  Leaving  these  Indian  fishermen  and  continuing  the 
voyage,  they  came  to  the  mouth  of  another  river  on  the 
right,  not  less  mighty  than  the  Motilones,  but  there  was  no 
pilot  in  the  expedition  who  knew  what  river  it  was,  with 
certainty : some  thought  it  was  the  Canela,1  which  rises  in 
Peru,  in  Quijos  at  the  back  of  Quito;  but  afterwards  it  was 
found  that  it  could  not  be  the  Canela,  because  that  river  came 
in  further  down,  and  near  the  island  of  Garcia ; thus  the 
first  mentioned  river  remained  without  a name. 

Eight  days  after  leaving  Cocama,  they  arrived  at  the 
island  of  Garcia  del  Arze,  where  they  found  him  and  his 
companions  in  their  fort,  having  nearly  lost  all  hope  of  the 
arrival  of  the  governor ; but  at  the  sight  of  Ursua  and  his 
people  they  were  happy  indeed,  as  was  the  governor  also. 

Here  they  met  with  Indian  towns  for  the  first  time  since 
they  left  the  Caperusos,  for  during  a voyage  of  three  hun- 
dred leagues  they  had  not  fallen  in  with  one  Indian  village. 

The  people  were  allowed  to  go  on  shore  for  eight  or  ten 

days,  so  as  to  rest  the  soldiers  and  rowers  ; and  also  to  take 
the  horses  on  shore  to  exercise  them,  for  they  had  not  been 
landed  since  they  first  went  on  board.  The  governor  sent 
out  parties  in  all  directions  in  search  of  Indian  towns,  but 
none  were  found. 

At  this  period  orders  were  given  to  supply  the  place  of 
one  of  the  flat  boats  that  had  been  built  of  unsound  wood, 
for  it  could  not  go  farther  than  this  spot. 

Ursua  now  found  himself  tired  of  the  sole  charge  over 
such  a mixture  of  people  as  his  expedition  was  composed  of. 
He  had  not  as  yet  named  his  lieutenant-general  to  assist 
him,  and  he  determined  to  confer  this  office  on  Juan  de 
Vargas,  and  that  of  Alferez-general  on  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man ; but  they  afterwards  repaid  these  honours  by  taking 
away  his  life. 

The  name  of  the  principal  Indian  in  this  place  was  Papa. 
The  natives  were  tall  and  strong,  clothed  in  well  woven 
cotton  shirt-like  coverings,  painted  various  colours.  No 
gold  was  found,  which  produced  dissatisfaction  amongst  the 
Spaniards,  seeing  that  they  had  journeyed  so  far  without 
meeting  with  the  least  sign  of  the  precious  metal.  The  food 
of  the  natives  was  mostly  maize,  of  which  they  make  much 
chicha.  They  also  prepare  chicha  of  the  yuca,  taking  so 
much  that  they  get  drunk,  the  great  sin  of  the  Indians  of 
these  lands.  They  have  batatas  (sweet  potatoes)  and  other 
roots ; beans  and  other  vegetables ; but  their  chief  food  is 
fish.  Their  huts  are  large  and  square  ; their  arms  are  darts 
of  palm  wood  with  points  of  the  same  wood,  like  the  Bis- 
cayan gurguzes , which  they  throw  with  wooden  anietos , 
otherwise  called  estolicas,1  the  principal  arm  of  the  natives. 

A little  below  this  island  the  river  enters,  which  is  called 
after  Francisco  de  Orellana,  or  that  of  the  Canela,  from  that 


captain  having  described  it.  As  we  have  already  said,  it 
rises  to  the  east  of  Quito. 

4.  Having  increased  the  number  of  canoes  and  rafts  to 
meet  their  wants,  for  much  of  their  cordage  had  already  be- 
come useless,  the  people  also  embarked  thirty-seven  horses, 
three  having  died  there.  They  began  the  descent  by  the 
inner  arm  of  the  river  going  east,  passing  many  islands,  all 
of  them  with  habitations,  although  at  that  period  the  Indians 
had  left  their  homes  and  retired  to  the  woods,  on  account  of 
the  fear  they  had  of  their  unfriendly  neighbours,  Garcia 
del  Arze  and  his  companions,  when  Arze  was  on  the  island 
up  the  river.  Thus  the  expedition  only  found  maize,  greens, 
batatas  half  grown,  some  white  cocks  and  hens  of  Castille, 
also  white  parrots  and  macaws,  things  until  then  unseen,  in 
the  plantations  of  the  natives.  Of  these  they  took  good 
quantity  to  supply  their  necessities,  for  they  were  badly  off 
for  provisions. 


CHAP.  VII. 

] . The  Indians  come  out  to  see  the  expedition  from  a distance , and  a 
chief  comes  with  offers  of  peace. — 2.  The  Indians  come  from  the 
province  of  Carari  with  some  provisions , which  they  barter  for 
trinkets. — 3.  The  governor  sends  an  officer  to  examine  the  country 
inland. — 4.  Punishments  which  Pedro  de  Ursua  inflicted  on  his 
people. — 5.  Opinions  entertained  respecting  this  province , whether 
there  were  one  or  two. 

They  sailed  amongst  these  islands,  taking  possession  of 
the  food  which  they  found  in  the  abandoned  villages,  until, 
after  several  days,  they  suddenly  came  on  one  which  was 


inhabited,  on  the  mainland,  on  the  right  hand  side,  built  on 
the  cliffs  which  overhang  the  river.  The  Indians  fled  from 
this  place,  as  they  had  done  from  all  the  other  villages.  It 
was  called  Carari,  which  name  was  afterwards  given  to  the 
province. 

Here  the  expedition  rested,  but,  although  many  attempts 
were  made,  the  Spaniards  could  not  lay  hands  on  any  of  the 
Indians ; for, though  some  were  seen  occasionally  at  a distance 
on  the  river,  who  came  out  in  their  canoes  to  see  the  strange 
fleet,  they  always  remained  afar  off,  owing  to  the  fear  which 
they  continued  to  feel.  One  chief  appeared  not  to  feel  so 
much  timidity  as  the  rest,  for,  after  three  or  four  days  he  came 
peacefully,  accompanied  by  some  Indians,  bringing  offerings 
of  fish,  maize,  and  other  food,  and  was  received  by  the 
governor  with  a show  of  great  friendship.  Ursua  embraced 
him,  and  gave  him  a few  trifling  presents,  such  as  glass 
beads,  knives,  looking  glasses,  and  other  childish  toys ; in- 
tending that  the  Indians  should,  by  this  treatment,  lose  their 
fear,  and  that  the  news  might  pass  amongst  them  from  one 
to  another  ; seeing  that  the  Spaniards  had  a bad  name,  owing 
to  the  acts  of  Garcia  del  Arze.  He  thus  hoped  that  their 
confidence  would  return,  and  that  they  would  supply  in- 
formation which  would  enable  him  to  obtain  some  insight 
into  the  nature  of  the  country,  for  he  wished  to  establish 
peace  with  all  the  natives,  along  the  whole  course  of  the 
river. 

2.  Desirous  of  securing  these  objects,  the  governor  sent 
the  chief  away,  very  well  satisfied  with  the  trifles  that  had 
been  given  to  him,  which  were  sufficient  to  cause  rumours  to 
spread  amongst  the  natives  and  provinces  lower  down  the 
river,  very  different  from  those  which  had  previously  been 
spread  concerning  the  Spaniards.  Very  soon  many  Indians 
began  to  come  peacefully,  bringing  provisions,  and  coveting 
such  trinkets  as  the  chief  had  shown  them,  some  of  which 


they  all  received  in  exchange  for  their  provisions  (the  poor 
people  having  nothing  else  to  sell)*  so  that  no  man  was  left 
unpaid*  at  least  so  far  as  the  governor  was  aware.  In  order 
to  prevent  the  knaveries  which  insolent  soldiery  are  in  the 
habit  of  committing  on  these  occasions*  especially  in  dealing 
with  Indians,  he  issued  an  order  that  no  soldier  should 
traffic  with  the  natives*  excepting  through  him*  or  in  his 
presence  ; and  thus  he  succeeded  in  satisfying  the  Indians. 
By  acting  in  this  way  the  governor  endeared  himself  with 
the  Indians ; and  if,  by  chance*  any  soldiers  bartered 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  governor,  they  paid  secretly 
for  the  provisions  which  they  obtained*  with  some  trifles. 
In  this  way  they  sailed  down  the  same  river  for  some 
days*  through  this  province  of  Carari ; and  the  Indians 
never  showed  greater  confidence  in  our  people*  waiting  in 
their  villages  with  all  their  property*  and  coming  out  on 
the  river  in  their  canoes*  to  these  barterings. 

3.  The  governor  saw  how  extensive  was  the  province 
which  bordered  the  river*  and,  desiring  to  discover  whether 
it  extended  far  inland,  and  whether  any  tidings  of  what  they 
were  seeking  could  be  found,  he  nominated  an  officer  named 
Pedro  Galeas*  with  a moderate  number  of  men,  to  march 
inland  and  find  out  what  he  could*  during  a specified  time, 
after  which  he  was  to  return  and  report  his  proceedings. 
The  rest  of  the  expedition  remained*  on  this  occasion,  at  a 
considerable  village,  which  they  found  to  be  larger  than  the 
others*  on  the  steep  ravines  bordering  on  the  river.  Pedro 
de  Galeas  departed  with  his  people*  and  marching  inland, 
along  the  banks  of  a creek  which  communicated  with  the 
river*  they  came  to  a path  leading  into  a dense  forest.  After 
following  it  for  a short  distance*  they  came  in  sight  of  some 
Indians  laden  with  cassava  and  other  eatables.  When  they 
saw  the  Spaniards,  being  astonished  at  their  appearance  and 
dress,  they  threw  away  their  loads,  and  fled  into  the  forest, 
which  being  very  dense*  and  they  having  the  start  and  run- 

ning  with  all  their  speed,  the  soldiers  were  unable  to  over- 
take any  except  an  Indian  woman.  She  appeared  to  be  of 
a different  nation,  judging  by  her  language  and  dress,  to 
those  who  dwelt  in  the  ravine,  and  the  other  people  whom 
they  had  met  with  on  the  river.  The  Spaniards,  therefore, 
believed  that  she  and  the  other  Indians  had  come  from 
another  province,  to  traffic  with  those  of  the  ravine.  Pre- 
sently they  began  to  ask  her  by  signs,  where  her  country 
was  ; and  she  replied,  in  the  same  way,  that  it  was  six  suns 
off,  that  is,  six  days  journey.  Having  now  finished  their 
provisions,  Galeas  determined  to  return  with  the  Indian  girl, 
to  the  place  where  the  governor  remained.  They  found 
him  in  great  trouble,  because  a soldier  named  Alonzo  de 
Montoya,  a turbulent  and  restless  man,  and  disaffected 
towards  Ursua,  had  collected  others  like  himself,  and  in- 
duced them  secretly  to  seize  several  canoes,  and  to  pull  up 
the  river,  in  order  to  return  to  Peru. 

4.  This  treason  was  disclosed  to  Ursua ; and  Montoya, 
having  before  attempted  to  desert,  was  imprisoned.  But 
Ursua  was  naturally  merciful,  indeed  too  merciful,  and  at 
times  his  acts  savoured  of  weakness.  Sometimes  he  punished 
those  who  deserved  severe  castigation  for  their  turbulence 
and  crimes,  making  them  row  for  some  days  in  the  brigan- 
tines and  canoes  ; when  some  of  the  soldiers  took  occasion 
(for  from  the  commencement  of  the  expedition  some  began 
to  plot  against  the  governor)  to  irritate  those  who  were 
undergoing  punishment,  by  telling  them  that  death  was  far 
better  than  such  disgrace.  These  malicious  sayings  were 
the  sparks  of  the  burning  villainy  which  filled  their  breasts, 
and  could  not  always  be  concealed.  Thus  the  murderers  of 
Ursua  continued  secretly  to  inflame  the  men  (for  they  were 
the  chief  disseminators  of  this  treason)  in  order  to  attract 
more  people  to  their  party,  and  obtain  the  object  of  their 
desires  more  securely. 

5.  It  did  not  appear  to  the  governor  that  the  information 

given  by  the  Indian  girl,  who  was  captured  by  Pedro  de 
Galeas,  was  of  sufficient  importance  to  induce  him  to  continue 
the  search  in  this  province,  for  that  rich  country  of  Omagua, 
the  name  of  which  was  not  even  known  to  the  natives.  He 
therefore  determined  to  continue  his  course,  more  especially 
as  the  fleet  was  badly  provisioned,  and  there  was  cause  to  fear 
that  they  might  be  in  want  of  all  supplies  before  arriving  at 
the  country  of  which  they  were  in  search.  Thus  they  sailed 
down  the  river,  until  they  arrived  at  a place  on  its  banks, 
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues  from  the  island  of 
Garcia.  According  to  the  opinion  of  some,  this  land  and  peo- 
ple are  divided  into  two  provinces,  one  called  Caricuri , the 
other  Manicuri ) Others  believed  that  the  whole  of  this 
district,  extending  for  one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues,  was 
one  single  province,  because  all  the  inhabitants  spoke  the 
same  language,  and  wore  the  same  dress  ; besides  the  two 
names  which  the  soldiers  had  understood  as  Caricuri  and 
Manicuri  were  two  villages,  and  not  two  provinces.  This 
region  has  remained  until  this  day  divided  between  these 
two  opinions,  without  any  more  accurate  accounts  having 
become  known.  All  agreed  in  one  thing,  which  was  that 
there  were  few  inhabitants,  for  the  villages  were  small, 
and  five  or  six  leagues  from  each  other  ; and  there  did  not 
appear  to  be  altogether  more  than  ten  thousand  or  twelve 
thousand  Indians,  which  was  very  few  for  so  extensive  a 
province,  and  compared  to  the  usual  population  in  other 
parts.  They  found  amongst  them,  some  pieces  of  fine  gold, 
which  they  wore  round  their  necks,  and  hung  from  their  ears 
and  noses  ; but  the  Spaniards,  passing  so  rapidly,  could  not 
learn  much  concerning  the  customs  or  religion  of  these  In- 
dians. They  only  knew  what  they  personally  saw  and  ob- 
tained in  this  country,  namely,  much  fruit,  many  roots  and 
grains,  which  they  enjoyed ; and  innumerable  quantities  of 


mosquitos  of  many  kinds,  especially  the  sand  flies,  Bozingle - 
ros , and  importunate  Xegenes. 


CHAP.  VIII. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  continues  his  course  through  a desert  region , where 
the  people  suffer  from  want. — 2.  They  establish  themselves  in  a village , 
where  they  make  up  for  passed  want  by  a large  supply  of  provisions. 
— 3.  The  governor , on  account  of  the  plentiful  supplies , determines 
to  encamp  in  the  village , pass  Christmas  there , and  make  inquiries 
respecting  the  land  for  which  they  are  searching. — 4.  Fifty  Span- 
iards depart  to  assist  the  chief  of  Machiparo , against  two  hundred 
hostile  Indians. 

1.  Our  people  were  detained  in  this  place  longer  than 
they  had  intended,  because  the  brigantine  had  at  last  gone 
to  the  bottom,  and  they  were  obliged  to  use  balsas  and 
canoes  for  all  the  people  and  the  cargo.  Afterwards, 
not  knowing  whether  this  was  the  last  village  which  they 
would  come  to,  they  departed  from  it  without  any  supply  of 
provisions,  expecting  to  obtain  them,  as  they  had  done  down 
to  this  place,  in  other  villages  lower  down  the  river.  This 
carelessness  was  not  a little  inconvenient,  for  next  day  a 
terrible  feeling  of  hunger  began  to  afflict  them,  which  con- 
tinued during  a voyage  of  nine  days  through  a country 
entirely  uninhabited,  and  during  the  whole  time  they  did 
not  meet  with  a single  Indian.  In  consequence  of  having 
left  the  province  of  Carari  without  obtaining  supplies,  they 
had  nothing  to  eat  during  all  this  time,  except  the  fish 
which  each  man  was  able  to  net  for  himself,  and  a few  turtles , 
hicoteas , bledos , and  verdolagos,  which  they  found  on  the 
banks  ; but  in  very  small  quantities  for  so  large  a party,  and 
in  some  places  they  found  none.  This  misery  increased 
their  weakness  each  day,  and  had  it  lasted  a little  longer 
they  must  all  have  died.  The  whole  blame  was  laid  on  the 

governor,  for  his  improvidence^;  for  had  he  informed  him- 
self of  this  long  tract  of  desert,  he  might  have  laid  in  a 
stock  of  provisions.  The  want  of  food  was  the  reason  which 
prevented  the  governor  from  stopping  to  examine  two 
mighty  rivers  with  turbid  waters,  caused  by  their  flowing 
through  ravines  with  reddish  soil.  They  join  the  main 
river  on  the  right  hand,  in  the  centre  of  this  desert.1  At 
length  they  arrived  at  a village  on  the  banks  of  the  river, 
where  the  inhabitants  were  quite  unprepared  for  the  arrival 
of  their  guests. 

£.  But  they  made  such  good  use  of  their  time,  fearing  the 
evils  which  might  come  upon  them,  at  the  hands  of  those 
who  were  invading  their  land,  that  embarking  all  the  pro- 
perty they  could  collect,  with  their  household  goods,  as 
quickly  as  possible  in  canoes,  they  went  down  the  river, 
leaving  the  fighting  men  in  the  village,  with  their  blow- 
pipes and  arrows  in  their  hands  to  defend  their  houses.  The 
governor,  seeing  this,  collected  together  such  soldiers  as 
were  most  at  hand,  with  their  arms,  and  went  on  ahead  with 
his  arquebus,  approaching  the  squadron  of  Indians  in  mili- 
tary order.  He  made  signs  to  them  with  a white  cloth 
which  he  held  in  his  hand  (after  having  ordered  his  soldiers 
to  give  no  offence),  desiring  to  make  them  understand  that 
no  harm  would  be  done  to  them.  When  the  Indians  under- 
stood this,  without  breaking  up  their  ranks  or  moving  from 
their  position,  one  man  came  out  from  among  them,  who  ap- 
peared to  be  a chief,  with  some  six  or  eight  followers.  He 
came  to  the  place  where  the  governor  stood,  and  took  the 
cloth  with  which  the  signs  had  been  made  in  his  hands,  as  a 
token  of  friendship.  He  and  his  followers  then  joined  the 
Spaniards,  and  they  walked  together  to  an  open  space  in 
the  village  where  the  Indians  were  under  arms ; and  stood 


watching  each  other,  until  the  rest  of  the  Spaniards  ap- 
peared, who  had  disembarked  behind  Ursua.  The  governor 
then,  by  the  best  signs  that  he  could  make,  asked  the  chief 
who  had  come  forward  to  parley,  to  allot  a part  of  the  vil- 
lage, with  the  provisions  in  the  houses,  for  lodgings  for  his 
people ; when  the  Indians,  with  their  women  and  children, 
might  safely  remain  in  the  remaining  part. 

The  Indians  willingly  agreed  to  this,  and  pointed  out  the 
principal  houses  to  the  governor,  where  his  people  might 
lodge ; and  it  was  agreed  that  they  should  not  enter  into 
the  part  retained  by  the  Indians,  nor  injure  them  in  any 
way  on  pain  of  death.  All  our  people  soon  “ took  the  belly 
of  the  evil  year”  (as  they  say),  with  the  plentiful  supply  of 
eatables  which  they  found,  of  maize,  beans,  roots,  together 
with  abundance  of  turtle  and  hicoteas , which  the  Indians 
kept  alive  in  ponds  near  their  houses,  surrounded  with 
pallisades,  and  it  appeared  to  the  Spaniards  that  there  were 
alive,  without  counting  those  which  had  been  recently  killed 
for  food,  more  than  six  or  seven  thousand.  The  Indians 
did  not  feel  much  confidence  when  they  saw  that  the  Span- 
iards were  so  numerous  ; and  each  one,  in  his  own  part  of 
the  village,  began  to  take  the  provisions,  and  hide  them  at 
night  by  little  and  little.  But  they  could  not  do  this  so 
secretly  as  to  prevent  the  soldiers,  who  were  mindful  of  their 
former  misery,  and  anxious  to  avoid  its  repetition  in 
future,  from  searching  for  the  provisions  which  the  In- 
dians were  hiding,  and  taking  what  they  found  to  their 
huts.  The  governor,  seeing  that  this  was  done  in  the  face 
of  fresh  threats,  and  anxious  to  chastise  the  insolence  of 
some  soldiers,  to  overawe  the  rest,  seized  upon  several. 
Among  these  was  a half  caste  servant  of  his  Alferez  General 
Don  Fernando  de  Guzman,  and  this  circumstance  was  made 
use  of  afterwards  by  the  discontented,  who  made  it  a point 
of  honour  with  Don  Fernando  that  the  governor  should 
have  imprisoned  his  servant,  telling  him  that  it  had  been 

done  as  an  insult,  or  at  least  that  it  was  a want  of  respect ; 
and  thus  they  worked  upon  him  to  join  their  side,  in  which 
they  afterwards  succeeded. 

3.  There  were  two  reasons  for  remaining  some  days  in 
this  village,  which  was  called  Machiparo1  (the  inhabitants 
being  very  different  in  their  dress  from  those  of  the  pro- 
vince of  Caricuri).  The  first  was  the  great  abundance  of 
eatables,  so  that  the  people  had  a good  opportunity  of  making 
up  for  their  former  hunger ; and  the  second  was  that  Christ- 
mas was  near,  of  the  year  1560.  Ursua  also  desired  to  make 
inquiries  of  the  Indians  of  the  village  and  its  neighbour- 
hood respecting  the  land  of  which  they  were  in  search.  Two 
days  after  their  arrival,  Ursua  sent  the  same  officer  as  before, 
Pedro  de  Galeas,  with  some  soldiers  in  canoes,  to  go  up  a 
creek  which  joined  the  river  at  a little  distance  from  the 
village.  Galeas  entered  by  a small  mouth,  consisting  of 
water  so  black  that  it  terrified  him,  and  seemed  a presage  of 
what  afterwards  happened.  After  navigating  the  creek  for 
a short  distance  they  came  to  a great  lake,  the  size  of  which 
astonished  them,  for  after  they  had  sailed  in  it  for  two  or 
three  leagues,  they  entirely  lost  sight  of  land ; and,  fearing 
that  if  they  wTent  any  further,  they  would  be  unable  to  find 
the  opening  by  which  they  had  entered  (after  having  gone 
along  the  land  for  some  days  without  finding  any  village,  or 
sign  of  inhabitants)  they  determined  to  return.2  While  this 
officer  was  thus  employed,  two  hundred  warlike  Indians 

came  down  the  river  in  canoes  from  the  province  of  Carari, 
to  attack  those  of  Machiparo,  with  whom  they  had  a feud  of 
a very  ancient  date.  They  were  not  aware  of  the  presence 
of  the  Spaniards,  but  came  down  with  great  clamour,  hoping 
to  give  no  time  for  defence,  but  to  assault  and  sack  the 
place  at  their  ease. 

4.  Arriving  with  this  intention  at  the  banks  of  the  river, 
near  the  village,  during  the  night,  and  recognizing  the 
strange  guests,  they  did  not  dare  to  make  an  assault  before 
daylight,  when  they  might  watch  what  took  place  in  the 
village.  In  the  morning  they  saw  that  all  the  Spaniards 
were  there,  and  that  their  expedition  had  ended  in  nothing ; 
so,  raising  great  shouts,  and  making  a noise  with  cornets  and 
other  instruments,  they  began  to  return  up  the  river.  Until 
these  noises  were  made,  the  people  of  Machiparo  had  not 
been  aware  of  their  approach  ; but  when  it  was  known,  the 
chief  went  to  the  governor  and  besought  him,  for  the  sake 
of  the  hospitality  he  had  received,  to  give  him  assistance  in 
chasing  the  enemy  who  had  come  to  kill  him,  and  destroy 
his  village  and  lands.  The  governor  consented  with  plea- 
sure, and,  with  the  rapidity  which  the  occasion  required, 
he  dispatched  his  lieutenant,  Don  Juan  de  Vargas,  with 
fifty  arquebusiers,  in  company  with  the  chief ; who  em- 
barked with  them,  and  some  of  his  Indians  in  canoes,  by 
another  branch  of  the  river.  They  went  so  quickly  that 
they  got  in  front  of  the  two  hundred,  and  surrounded  them, 
without  the  possibility  of  escape.  The  Cararis  were  so 
encircled  that  they  were  forced  to  fight,  believing  that  they 
had  to  deal  with  none  but  the  Indians  of  Machiparo ; but 
when,  afterwards,  they  saw  that  the  Spaniards  had  come  to 
assist  them,  they  began  to  make  signs  of  peace.  This  ap- 
peared an  untoward,  nay  scandalous  thing  to  the  soldiers, 
who  thought  they  might  thus  be  deprived  of  their  spoils  ; so 
they  were  deaf  to  the  prayers  of  the  Indians,  and  began  to 
discharge  their  arquebuses,  and  to  do  the  Indians  so  much 

damage,  that  they  left  their  canoes  and  fled  into  the  woods, 
which  were  so  thick  that,  though  the  Spaniards  and  friendly 
Indians  followed,  they  could  not  catch  more  than  five  or 
six,  and,  with  all  their  canoes,  they  returned  to  Machiparo. 
It  was  understood  that  all  the  Indians  would  perish  for 
want  of  food  in  the  forests,  or  be  killed  by  the  Machiparos, 
having  no  canoes  in  which  to  return  to  their  own  country, 
and  the  road  by  land  being  very  long  ; but  the  truth  could 
never  be  known,  on  account  of  the  few  days  which  the 
Spaniards  afterwards  remained  there. 


CHAP.  IX. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  names  a provisor  or  vicar-general  for  his  fleet,  be- 
lieving he  had  power  to  do  so. — 2.  Some  grow  faint  hearted  at  the 
continuation  of  the  expedition , and  the  governor  encourages  them  to 
proceed. — 3.  Excuses  which  the  mutineers  make  to  Pedro  de  Ursua 
for  their  delinquencies. — 4.  The  mutineers  conspire  to  rid  themselves 
of  the  government  of  Ursua , and  to  make  Don  Fernando  de  Guzman 
his  successor. 

1.  Pedro  de  Ursua  conceived  that  this  land  was  within  his 
jurisdiction  ; as,  according  to  the  conjectures  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians,  and  of  one  of  their  Portuguese  companions,  whom 
they  took  as  guides,  it  was  not  distant  from  the  land  of  the 
Omaguas.  He,  therefore,  felt  it  to  be  necessary  to  regulate 
the  affairs  of  his  government,  which  he  had  not  yet  done, 
especially  as  regarded  those  which  concerned  spiritual  mat- 
ters. Some  priests  who  were  in  the  fleet,  quarrelled  amongst 
themselves  for  want  of  a chief : so  he  determined  to  nominate 
from  among  them  a vicar -general,  who,  in  spiritual  affairs, 
should  have  jurisdiction  over  the  fleet.  He  considered  that 
he  had  powers  to  make  such  a nomination,  in  the  same  way 
as  his  majesty,  whose  person  he  represented,  had  to  make 

bishops  and  other  dignitaries ; so  he  selected  for  this  office 
a priest  named  Alonzo  Henao.  This  man  began  to  exercise 
the  duties  of  his  office  by  promulgating  certain  excommu- 
nications against  those  who  did  not  restore  to  Ursua  all 
kinds  of  goods,  live  stock,  tools,  arms,  and  munitions  which 
they  had  taken.  Those  who  envied  the  governor,  publicly 
said  that  he  had  nominated  this  man  to  be  vicar-general,  in 
order  that  he  might  promulgate  those  excommunications, 
and  not  from  zeal  for  the  public  service  ; and  declared  that 
he  had  no  right  to  name  an  ecclesiastical  judge.  All  the 
people  in  the  camp  were  in  this  state  of  excitement  when 
Pedro  Alonzo  Galeas  returned  with  the  news  which  we  have 
related,  and  which  caused  new  doubts  to  arise  respecting 
the  chance  of  finding  the  land  of  the  Omaguas. 

2.  Not  only  the  Brazilian  Indians,  and  their  companion 
the  Spaniard1  whom  they  took  as  a guide,  but  also  others 
who  had  descended  this  river  with  Captain  Orellana,  ob- 
served that  they  had  now  sailed  for  many  days,  that  the 
river  was  of  great  magnitude,  and  that  they  could  neither 
recognize  the  land,  nor  the  place  where  they  had  encamped, 
and  their  accounts  differed  one  from  the  other.  Some  of 
the  evil  intentioned  among  the  adventurers,  who  had  con- 
certed a rising  amongst  themselves,  began  to  spread  a 
rumour  that  all  had  been  deceived,  for  that  they  had  jour- 
neyed more  than  seventy  leagues,  and  had  neither  met  with 
the  rich  provinces  for  which  they  were  in  search,  nor  even 
found  any  sign  by  which  they  might  ascertain  in  what  direc- 
tion to  search.  They  declared  that  it  would  be  best  to 
return  up  the  river  and  go  back  to  Peru,  as  there  appeared 
to  be  no  hope  of  success.  These  arguments,  and  others  by 
which  the  mutineers  spread  their  poison  throughout  the 
camp,  came  to  the  ears  of  the  governor ; who  sent  for  some 
of  the  chief  malcontents  to  satisfy  them,  and  insisted  upon 
the  obligation  not  to  lose  all  hope  of  bringing  their  enter- 


prise  to  a fortunate  conclusion,  and  upon  the  duty  of  not 
giving  up  the  expedition.  He  declared  that  there  was  no 
occasion  for  despair  because  the  expeditions  inland  had  led 
to  small  results ; and  that,  of  necessity,  they  must  suffer 
hardships,  without  which  no  Indian  province  would  ever 
have  been  discovered  or  settled.  Perseverance,  he  said, 
would  overcome  all  difficulties  : and  even  if  it  was  necessary 
to  search  from  youth  until  old  age,  that  this  was  a small 
thing  in  comparison  with  the  attainment  of  such  vast  riches 
as  rumour  had  reported. 

3.  Those  who,  in  good  faith,  had  undertaken  this  expedi- 
tion, thought  much  of  these  words  of  the  governor,  which 
caused  them  to  take  heart  again,  and  they  determined  to 
continue  in  the  enterprise,  and  die  at  their  posts ; but  others, 
who  came  with  different  intentions,  such  as  the  mutineers 
Lope  de  Aguirre,  Montoya,  Salduendo,  and  their  allies, 
seeing  that  they  were  unable  to  attain  their  object  by  these 
means,  sought  out  other  ways  of  exasperating  the  army 
against  the  governor,  saying  that  he  was  a harsh  man,  and 
that  the  mildness  with  which  he  had  begun  to  govern  had 
been  changed  to  severity.  They  did  not  forget  to  add  to 
this  that  he  was  so  weak  as  to  allow  Doha  Inez  to  govern 
the  army  through  him,  and  that  the  soldiers  were  condemned 
to  row  in  the  boats  for  their  crimes,  solely  that  they  might 
row  in  the  canoe  of  Doha  Inez  : that  he  always  made  his 
hut  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  army,  when  he  ought  to  be  in 
its  centre,  because  he  detested  the  company  of  the  soldiers ; 
that  he  was  an  enemy  of  giving  away  and  a friend  of  re- 
ceiving ; that  what  he  received,  he  considered  to  be  offered 
as  an  obligation  ; and  finally,  that  he  was  ignorant  in  affairs 
of  war,  as  well  as  in  those  of  government ; sufficient  reasons 
for  all  the  army  to  hate  him,  especially  when  he  had  said 
that  such  should  be  their  patience  and  endurance  under  the 
greatest  privations,  that  even  the  boys  of  the  expedition 
should  grow  grey  in  it,  if  necessary. 


4.  The  principal  mutineers,  who  went  about  with  these 
sayings  (desiring  either  to  get  rid  of  the  governor  by  killing 
him,  or  by  returning  to  Peru),  were  Alonzo  de  Montoya, 
Lope  de  Aguirre,  Juan  Alonzo  de  la  Bandera,  Lorenzo 
Salduendo,  Miguel  Serrano  de  Cazeres,  Pedro  de  Mirando 
(a  Mulatto),  Martin  Perez,  Pedro  Fernandez,  Diego  de 
Torres,  Alonzo  de  Villena,  Christoval  Hernandez,  Juan  de 
Vargas,  and  others.  They  were  now  resolved,  and  it  seemed 
to  them  absolutely  necessary,  to  elect  another  chief  to  lead 
them  in  place  of  Ursua  ; yet  there  was  no  man  whom  the 
whole  expedition  was  willing  to  obey,  as  they  were  all  of 
low  degree,  and  of  little  note  or  authority  ; for  the  few  who 
could  claim  gentle  origin  were  devoted  to  Ursua ; and  if 
they  were  aware  of  this  treason,  they  would  frustrate  the 
designs  of  the  mutineers.  At  length  they  decided  upon 
speaking  with  the  Alfarez-General,  Don  Fernando  de  Guz- 
man, who  was  held  to  be  of  noble  blood,  and  well  disposed 
towards  the  soldiers  ; so,  entering  by  the  door  of  ambition 
(which  is  always  open)  they  offered  to  put  his  hands  into  it, 
up  to  the  elbows,  by  making  him  the  successor  of  Pedro  de 
Ursua.  The  mutineers  whose  names  we  have  mentioned, 
having  determined  upon  this,  spoke  with  him  one  night,  and 
disclosed  their  intentions  to  him,  saying  that  they  were 
founded  in  a holy  zeal  (there  is  no  greater  crime  than  that 
which  is  done  under  the  mask  of  religion !)  and  that  their 
designs  would  be  for  the  good  of  the  expedition,  and  espe- 
cially for  the  service  of  God  and  the  king.  They  told  him 
that  he  should  accept  the  office,  for  that  his  birth  and 
merits  were  worthy  of  greater  honours  ; that  the  miseries 
occasioned  by  the  injustice  of  Ursua  were  notorious;  and 
that  if  his  rule  continued  much  longer,  it  would  be  the 
occasion  of  infinite  damage  to  the  king’s  service.  They 
pressed  these  arguments  upon  him,  saying  that  he  had  been 
insulted  by  the  arrest  of  his  servant,  without  respect  for  his 
noble  blood,  nor  for  his  office  of  Alferez-General ; and  that 


if  this  scheme  were  successful,  and  he  took  the  office  of 
general,  with  the  consent  of  all  the  people,  then,  by  his 
good  government  and  arrangements,  they  would  discover 
the  land  for  which  they  were  in  search,  and,  having  settled 
it,  his  majesty  would  consider  it  a good  service,  and  would 
specially  reward  him.  If  it  should  appear  best  to  all  not  to 
kill  the  governor,  but  to  leave  him  in  that  village,  with  some 
of  his  friends,  it  might  be  done,  as  it  would  not  cause  so 
much  scandal  to  the  world,  as  his  death. 


CHAP.  X. 

1.  The  mutineers  determine  to  kill  the  governor , Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  to 
return  to  Peru. — 2.  Mysterious  warning  of  the  death  of  Ursua, 
which  was  seen  and  heard  by  a knight  of  the  order  of  San  Juan. — 
3.  They  continue  their  course  from  this  village  to  another  lower  down , 
of  the  same  name.  A slave  of  one  of  the  mutineers  discovers  their 
design,  and  attempts  to  warn  the  governor.  The  mutineers  kill  the 
governor  Pedro  de  Ursua,  and  his  lieutenant. 

Don  Fernando  did  not  dislike  the  arguments  of  the  muti- 
neers, nor  was  he  deterred  either  by  the  grave  embarrass- 
ments which  might  follow,  nor  by  the  loyalty  which  (he 
being  a knight)  should  have  bound  him  to  protect  Ursua, 
after  the  honours  he  had  received  from  him,  and  the  con- 
sideration with  which  he  had  always  been  treated  by  him. 
He  believed  all  that  had  been  told  him  by  the  mutineers, 
and,  swelled  up  by  the  wind  of  ambition,  he  gave  them 
thanks  for  what  they  had  offered  him,  and  assented  to  all 
their  projects  ; so  that  it  appeared  to  the  messengers  that 
they  now  had  all  that  was  necessary,  in  order  to  put  their 
designs  into  execution.  The  mutineers,  and  Don  Fernando 
among  them,  as  their  chief,  conferred  together,  and  began 
to  offer  various  opinions  (children  of  tyranny  and  heresy) 


respecting  the  mode  of  proceeding  ; to  some  it  seemed  best 
to  leave  Pedro  de  Ursua,  with  some  of  his  friends  in  that 
place  (as  had  been  suggested  to  Don  Fernando)  and,  taking 
all  the  boats  and  canoes,  to  return  up  the  river  to  Peru : 
others,  among  whom  were  Don  Fernando,  said  that  they 
would  only  do  that  which  had  been  originally  proposed, 
namely,  return  to  Peru  by  descending  the  river,  with  the 
whole  expedition,  leaving  Ursua  behind  : but  there  was  a 
third  party,  among  whom  were  those  two  good  souls,  Lope 
de  Aguirre  and  Lorenzo  Salduendo,  who  declared  that  all 
they  had  heard  was  unwise,  but  that  the  only  plan  was  to 
kill  Pedro  de  Ursua  and,  with  all  the  people,  return  to  Peru, 
and  make  Don  Fernando  the  lord  of  the  country.  Don 
Fernando,  giving  reins  to  an  ambition  which  he  was  already 
relishing,  and  promising  to  himself  the  enjoyment  of  the 
riches  of  Peru,  also  because  it  was  of  little  avail  to  say  any- 
thing else,  gave  out  that  the  opinions  of  the  two  (Aguirre 
and  Salduendo)  appeared  good  to  him ; and  the  rest  con- 
senting, it  was  agreed  that  Ursua  and  his  lieutenant  Don 
Juan  should  die.  From  this  time  they  sought  for  an  occa- 
sion to  commit  the  deed,  and  busied  themselves  in  gaining 
over  the  soldiers,  that  they  might  be  on  their  side,  when  it 
became  necessary. 

2.  Omens  were  not  wanting,  which  might  have  served  as 
warnings  to  Ursua ; for,  besides  those  we  have  mentioned, 
(seeing  that  some,  with  small  reason,  had  predicted  the  fate 
of  the  expedition)  on  the  same  day  that  the  mutineers 
resolved  upon  the  murder,  and  five  before  it  was  perpetrated, 
being  one  of  those  of  the  feast  of  the  Nativity  (for  in  this 
way  did  these  men  celebrate  it),  a comendador  of  the  order 
of  San  Juan,  named  Juan  Gomez  de  Guevara,  a great  friend 
of  Ursua’s,  ripe  in  years,  of  grave  demeanour,  and  strictly 
honest  and  true,  whilst  he  was  out  walking,  at  the  second  or 
third  hour  of  the  night,  enjoying  the  freshness  of  the  air 
near  the  door  of  his  hut,  which  was  next  to  that  of  the 

governor,  beheld  something  like  a shade  passing  near  the 
governor’s  hut,  from  which  a rough  and  unknown  voice  pro- 
ceeded, which  said — “ Pedro  de  Ursua,  governor  of  Omagua 
and  of  El  Dorado,  God  pardon  thee!”  The  comendador 
hurried  to  the  spot  where  he  had  seen  the  object,  and  heard 
the  voice,  but  it  had  disappeared  without  leaving  a trace  of 
what  it  was ; he  could  not,  however,  persuade  himself  that  what 
he  had  seen  was  a human  being,  and  he  remained  in  a state 
of  astonishment  and  confusion.  He  communicated  what  he 
had  seen  to  some  of  his  friends,  and  conferred  with  them  on 
the  propriety  of  informing  the  governor ; but  they  deter- 
mined not  to  do  so,  considering  that,  as  he  was  in  a bad 
state  of  health,  this  might  aggravate  his  illness  and  cause 
him  to  believe  that  his  time  was  come. 

S.  The  governor  was  more  careless  than  he  ought  to  have 
been  (while  these  things  were  passing  amongst  the  muti- 
neers), considering  that  he  was  not  without  friends  who 
desired  to  put  him  on  his  guard  (though  none  of  them 
believed  that  things  had  become  so  serious),  and  that  he 
should  always  have  had  a guard  about  his  person,  of  soldiers 
and  friends.  He,  however,  did  not  hearken  to  their  advice, 
nor  cause  a guard  to  be  in  attendance,  which  led  men  to  say 
that  he  wished  to  be  alone  with  Doha  Inez,  and  without 
witnesses.  However  that  may  be,  either  from  carelessness, 
or  too  much  confidence,  he  never  had  any  one,  either  within 
or  without  his  house,  but  his  pages.  Although  the  mutineers 
were  on  the  watch,  without  losing  any  opportunity,  they 
were  unable  to  perpetrate  the  deed  while  they  remained  in 
this  village  of  Machiparo,  which  they  left  on  the  day  after 
Christmas.  They  sailed  all  day,  until  sunset,  when  they 
reached  another  village  of  the  same  name,  six  or  eight 
leagues  distant.  This  village  had  been  abandoned  by  its 
inhabitants,  who  had  fled  from  the  fear  they  had  of  our 
people,  who  took  up  their  abode  there,  without  any  obstacle 
being  made.  The  governor  now  became  anxious,  as  it 


appeared  to  him  (according  to  the  report  of  the  Brazilian 
Indians)  that  they  must  be  near  the  place  where  they  might 
hear  news  of  the  province  of  the  Omaguas.  He  was  shown  a 
broad  road  which  led  from  the  village  towards  the  interior, 
(as  it  was  said)  to  a large  city  or  province;  so  he  determined 
to  send  a party  of  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  one  Sancho 
Pizarro,  to  discover  this  new  land. 

4.  The  mutineers  considered  that  this  opportunity  ought 
not  to  be  lost,  when  so  many  of  the  governor’s  friends  were 
absent  with  this  expedition,  and  they  resolved  that  he  should 
be  killed  without  loss  of  time.  They  consulted  together  on 
the  morning  of  New  Year’s  day,  and  determined  to  perpe- 
trate the  murder  that  evening,  when  the  governor,  on  so 
solemn  an  occasion,  would  be  enjoying  himself,  and  off  his 
guard.  The  movements  of  the  mutineers  were  not  so  secret 
but  that  a black  slave  of  Juan  Alonzo  de  la  Bandera,  called 
Juan  Primero  (through  an  inspiration  of  heaven,  or  moved 
by  the  atrocity  of  the  meditated  act,  or  perhaps  thinking 
that,  by  imparting  the  secret,  he  would  be  set  free)  made 
an  excuse  to  go  to  the  lodging  of  the  governor,  to  give 
him  an  account  of  what  was  passing.  But  this  circumstance 
did  not  stop  the  blow  levelled  at  Ursua,  who  was  then  with 
Doha  Ines  ; so  that  the  slave  could  not  communicate  with 
him  personally,  neither  could  he  await  the  governor’s 
appearance,  for  fear  of  being  missed  by  his  master.  Still 
the  slave  did  his  best,  by  telling  the  object  of  his  coming  to 
another  negro,  the  slave  of  Ursua,  and  directing  him  to  in- 
form his  master.  The  governor’s  slave  either  forgot  to 
deliver  the  message  or,  fearing  to  tell  his  master,  the  day 
passed  without  Ursua  being  aware  of  what  was  going  on. 

5.  The  night  arrived  (the  cloak  to  sinners),  when  all  the 
conspirators  met  at  Don  Fernando’s  lodging  (so  as  to  be 
more  secure)  and  sent  a Mestizo  servant,  as  an  excuse,  for 
some  oil,  so  that  he  might  see  who  was  with  the  governor 
and  what  he  was  doing.  The  servant  went,  and  having  pro- 


cured  what  he  was  sent  for,  returned  and  told  the  conspira- 
tors that  the  governor  was  alone. 

It  was  the  second  hour  of  the  night,  on  the  day  of  the 
Circumcision,  when  the  rebels  left  the  lodging  of  Don  Fer- 
nando, with  the  diabolical  intention  of  assailing  the  governor, 
and  taking  his  life.  They  were  eager  in  their  steps  (to  take 
vengeance  for  the  insults  they  said  they  had  received  from 
him).  Alonzo  de  Montoya  was  the  first  in  advance,  with 
Christoval  Hernandez  de  Chaves,  and,  entering  Ursua’s 
house,  they  found  him  in  his  hammock  talking  to  a little 
page  named  Lorca.  When  they  saluted  the  governor,  he 
said,  “What  seek  ye  here,  Caballeros,  at  this  hour?”  the 
reply  was  several  stabs,  which  missed  him.  He  then  rose 
from  his  hammock  to  reach  his  sword  and  buckler,  which  he 
had  at  hand,  when  the  rest  of  the  mutineers  entered,  and 
they  all  made  a murderous  onset  on  Ursua,  so  that  he  soon 
fell  dead,  without  being  able  to  say  more  than  “ Confessio, 
confessio,  miserere  mei  Deus.”  The  deed  being  done,  they 
sallied  out  of  the  hut,  and  one  of  them,  with  a loud  voice, 
shouted  “ Liberty,  liberty ! long  live  the  king,  the  tyrant  is 
dead.”  This  was  heard  by  the  lieutenant  Juan  de  Vargas, 
who  lived  hard  by,  and  he  hastily  put  on  his  escaupil,1  with 
his  sword,  shield,  and  rod  of  office,  and  went  towards  the 
governor’s  lodging,  whence  he  had  heard  the  cries,  and 
meeting  the  murderers  in  the  road,  who  were  in  search  of 
him,  they  recognized  him,  and  attacked  him,  taking  from 
him  his  sword  and  shield  and  armour,  so  as  to  serve  him  as 
they  had  the  governor.  Then,  having  torn  away  one  sleeve 
of  the  escaupil,  and  getting  away  the  other,  one  of  these 
monsters  of  Satan,  named  Martin  Perez,  infuriated  with 
his  diabolical  intention,  gave  him  so  severe  a thrust  that 
the  sword  went  through  and  through  his  body,  the  point 
wounding  his  companion  badly,  who  was  behind  the  lieu- 

tenant,  occupied  in  disarming  him.  The  rest,  coming  up, 
gave  Vargas  more  stabs  than  were  necessary  to  take  away 
life ; after  which  some  cried  out,  “ Liberty,  Caballeros ; long 
live  the  king!  we  will  not  be  subject  to  those  whose  only 
occupations  were  their  pleasures ! it  was  not  for  this  that  we 
left  our  homes.” 